1. Bull World Health Organ. 2000;78(9):1136-47.

Climate change and vector-borne diseases: a regional analysis.

Githeko AK(1), Lindsay SW, Confalonieri UE, Patz JA.

Author information:
(1)Climate and Human Health Research Unit, Kenya Medical Research Institute, 
Kisumu, Kenya. AGitheko@kisian.mimcom.net

Current evidence suggests that inter-annual and inter-decadal climate 
variability have a direct influence on the epidemiology of vector-borne 
diseases. This evidence has been assessed at the continental level in order to 
determine the possible consequences of the expected future climate change. By 
2100 it is estimated that average global temperatures will have risen by 1.0-3.5 
degrees C, increasing the likelihood of many vector-borne diseases in new areas. 
The greatest effect of climate change on transmission is likely to be observed 
at the extremes of the range of temperatures at which transmission occurs. For 
many diseases these lie in the range 14-18 degrees C at the lower end and about 
35-40 degrees C at the upper end. Malaria and dengue fever are among the most 
important vector-borne diseases in the tropics and subtropics; Lyme disease is 
the most common vector-borne disease in the USA and Europe. Encephalitis is also 
becoming a public health concern. Health risks due to climatic changes will 
differ between countries that have developed health infrastructures and those 
that do not. Human settlement patterns in the different regions will influence 
disease trends. While 70% of the population in South America is urbanized, the 
proportion in sub-Saharan Africa is less than 45%. Climatic anomalies associated 
with the El Ni√±o-Southern Oscillation phenomenon and resulting in drought and 
floods are expected to increase in frequency and intensity. They have been 
linked to outbreaks of malaria in Africa, Asia and South America. Climate change 
has far-reaching consequences and touches on all life-support systems. It is 
therefore a factor that should be placed high among those that affect human 
health and survival.

PMCID: PMC2560843
PMID: 11019462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. JAMA. 1996 Jan 17;275(3):217-23.

Global climate change and emerging infectious diseases.

Patz JA(1), Epstein PR, Burke TA, Balbus JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins School of 
Hygiene and Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205-2179, USA.

Comment in
    JAMA. 1996 Aug 7;276(5):372-3; author reply 373-4.
    JAMA. 1996 Aug 7;276(5):373-4.

Climatic factors influence the emergence and reemergence of infectious diseases, 
in addition to multiple human, biological, and ecological determinants. 
Climatologists have identified upward trends in global temperatures and now 
estimate an unprecedented rise of 2.0 degrees C by the year 2100. Of major 
concern is that these changes can affect the introduction and dissemination of 
many serious infectious diseases. The incidence of mosquito-borne diseases, 
including malaria, dengue, and viral encephalitides, are among those diseases 
most sensitive to climate. Climate change would directly affect disease 
transmission by shifting the vector's geographic range and increasing 
reproductive and biting rates and by shortening the pathogen incubation period. 
Climate-related increases in sea surface temperature and sea level can lead to 
higher incidence of water-borne infectious and toxin-related illnesses, such as 
cholera and shellfish poisoning. Human migration and damage to health 
infrastructures from the projected increase in climate variability could 
indirectly contribute to disease transmission. Human susceptibility to 
infections might be further compounded by malnutrition due to climate stress on 
agriculture and potential alterations in the human immune system caused by 
increased flux of ultraviolet radiation. Analyzing the role of climate in the 
emergence of human infectious diseases will require interdisciplinary 
cooperation among physicians, climatologists, biologists, and social scientists. 
Increased disease surveillance, integrated modeling, and use of geographically 
based data systems will afford more anticipatory measures by the medical 
community. Understanding the linkages between climatological and ecological 
change as determinants of disease emergence and redistribution will ultimately 
help optimize preventive strategies.

PMID: 8604175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Bull World Health Organ. 1997;75(6):583-8.

Climate change, human health, and sustainable development.

Martens WJ(1), Slooff R, Jackson EK.

Author information:
(1)Maastricht University, Department of Mathematics, Netherlands.

Human-induced climate change threatens ecosystems and human health on a global 
scale. In order to withstand the worldwide threats to ecosystems, the concept of 
sustainable development was introduced during the 1980s. Since then, this 
concept has been widely applied to guide and focus policy-making. The present 
article reviews the health consequences of human-induced climate change on 
sustainable development, particularly the potential impact of such change of 
food supply, natural disasters, infectious diseases, ecosystems, and sea level 
rise. Discussed is an integrated model containing the key indicators of 
sustainable development. The relevance of climate change, human health, and 
sustainable development for international climate change policy is also 
examined.

PMCID: PMC2487025
PMID: 9509631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Aust N Z J Public Health. 2000 Dec;24(6):630-2. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-842x.2000.tb00531.x.

Impacts of climate and climate change on medications and human health.

Beggs PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Geography, Division of Environmental and Life 
Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109. pbeggs@ocs1.ocs.mq.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: To examine impacts of climate and climate change on medications and 
human health.
METHODS: Literature review and analysis of MIMS.
RESULTS: Changed climate associated with the enhanced Greenhouse Effect (e.g. 
increased temperature) may lead to medication-related health impacts through 
deterioration of storage conditions, increased heat stress from 
medication-induced heat intolerance, and by influencing pharmacokinetics. 
Increases in UV radiation from stratospheric ozone depletion may increase the 
significance of medications that can lead to an increased sensitivity to the 
damaging effects of UV radiation (i.e. photosensitivity).
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Raising awareness of the impacts of climate on 
medications, and of climate-related side-effects, among both health care 
professionals and the public, should modify behaviour and therefore reduce the 
risks of such adverse impacts.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-842x.2000.tb00531.x
PMID: 11215015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Med War. 1995 Oct-Dec;11(4):168-78. doi: 10.1080/07488009508409236.

The potential health impacts of climate change: an overview.

Kovats S(1), Haines A.

Author information:
(1)University College London Medical School, Whittington Hospital.

Climate change would have a range of impacts on human health. Health impacts 
would be caused by the direct effect of climatic factors on human health, such 
as heat stress, and possible changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme 
weather events such as storms, floods and droughts. Impacts on health would also 
be mediated by the indirect effects of climate change, such as changes in 
availability of food and water and the distribution of vector-borne diseases. 
The majority of health impacts would be adverse and would depend greatly on the 
vulnerability of populations.

DOI: 10.1080/07488009508409236
PMID: 8559115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Environ Health Perspect. 1998 Feb;106 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):241-51. doi: 
10.1289/ehp.98106s1241.

Health impacts of climate change and ozone depletion: an ecoepidemiologic 
modeling approach.

Martens WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Maastricht University, Department of Mathematics, The Netherlands. 
p.martens@math.unimaas.nl

Anthropogenic climate changes and stratospheric ozone depletion affect human 
health in various ways. Current mainstream epidemiologic research methods do not 
appear well adapted to analyze these health impacts, which involve complex 
systems influenced by human interventions or simpler processes that will take 
place in the future. This paper discusses a different paradigm for studying the 
health impacts of global environmental changes and focuses on the development of 
integrated ecoepidemiologic models using three examples--the effect of climate 
change on vector-borne diseases, the effect of climate change on thermal-related 
mortality, and the effects of increasing ultraviolet levels because of ozone 
depletion on the rates of skin cancer.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.98106s1241
PMCID: PMC1533278
PMID: 9539017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Environ Health Perspect. 1999 Feb;107 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):169-79. doi: 
10.1289/ehp.99107s1169.

Public health consequences of global climate change in the United States--some 
regions may suffer disproportionately.

Longstreth J(1).

Author information:
(1)The Waste Policy Institute, Arlington, Virginia and The Institute for Global 
Risk Research, LLC, Bethesda, MD 20817, USA. tigerr@cpcug.org

Current risk assessments of the likely regional health impacts of global climate 
change (GCC) are hindered by two factors. First, dose-response relationships 
between weather parameters and many of the likely health effects have not been 
developed, and second, reliable estimates of future regional climates across the 
United States are still beyond the scope of current modeling efforts. 
Consequently, probabilistic risk estimates of most of the likely regional health 
impacts of GCC have such a high degree of uncertainty that their usefulness to 
health officials dealing with regional issues is very limited. With the numerous 
pressures on today's health care systems, it is understandable that the possible 
consequences of GCC have received scant attention from regional health care 
decision makers. Indeed, the consensus among this community appears to be that 
any increases in health effects associated with GCC will be easily handled by 
the current health care system. However, such a position may be naive as the 
potential exists that an unequal distribution of such effects could overwhelm 
some regions, whereas others may feel little or no impact. This review of the 
likely regional impacts of GCC has been structured as a semianalytical look at 
this issue of distributional effects. Because of the lack of dose-response 
information and reliable estimates of future regional climates, however, it 
takes a historical perspective. That is, it assumes that the quality and 
quantity of health risks a region faces under GCC will be directly related to 
its recent history of health risks from warm weather/climate-related diseases as 
well as to the size, characteristics, and distribution of the sensitive 
subpopulations currently residing within its borders. The approach is 
semiquantitative; however, it uses national data gathered on a regional level 
and as such should only be used to generate a hypothesis rather than test it. 
When applied to the United States, its outcome leads to the hypothesis that if 
indeed history repeats itself, some states or regions may be more greatly 
affected by GCC than others, not only because historically they are more prone 
to summer weather/climate-related diseases, but also because they contain a 
greater proportion of the sensitive subpopulations in the United States.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.99107s1169
PMCID: PMC1566351
PMID: 10229716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Environ Health Perspect. 1991 Dec;96:139-44. doi: 10.1289/ehp.9196139.

Anticipated public health consequences of global climate change.

Longstreth J(1).

Author information:
(1)Battelle Washington Operations, Washington, DC 20024-2115.

Human activities are placing enormous pressures on the biosphere. The 
introduction of new chemicals and the increasing ambient levels of existing 
chemicals have resulted in atmospheric degradation. This paper reviews some of 
the adverse effects of stratospheric ozone depletion and global warming. Because 
the atmospheric effects of ozone depletion are fairly well characterized, 
quantitative risk estimates have been developed. However, because the 
atmospheric effects of global warming are less understood, public health 
problems that could be intensified by climate change are assessed qualitatively. 
The interactive effects of these two phenomena are also discussed.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.9196139
PMCID: PMC1568227
PMID: 1820256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Parasitol. 1998 Jun;28(6):955-69. doi: 10.1016/s0020-7519(98)00053-8.

Mosquito-borne arboviruses in Australia: the current scene and implications of 
climate change for human health.

Russell RC(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Sydney, NSW, Australia. RichardR@cidm.wh.su.edu.au

Of the mosquito-borne arboviruses, the encephalitic Murray Valley encephalitis 
and Kunjin viruses are a major public health concern, but the arthritides Ross 
River and Barmah Forest viruses are more important in a public health sense, 
being responsible for a far greater number of infections. Reported cases of Ross 
River totalled approximately 30,000 during 1991-1996; there have been several 
widely separated outbreaks of Barmah Forest in recent years and case reports are 
increasing annually. Surveillance programmes have increased our understanding of 
the geographic regions, climatic conditions and vector factors associated with 
viruses. Virus activity is widespread but is often localised, is driven 
primarily by mosquito abundance and various species are involved; host factors 
are involved also, but are not well understood. Typically, mosquito populations 
are governed by availability of habitat and environmental conditions. Models of 
climate change predict increases in rainfall, tides and temperature for parts of 
Australia, and such changes have the potential to increase the risk of arbovirus 
transmission by increasing the distribution and abundance of vectors, and 
duration of mosquito and arbovirus seasons. However, the amplitude of climate 
change is uncertain and the ecology of arbovirus transmission is complex. It is 
likely that some areas will have increases in arbovirus activity and human 
infection with predicted climate change, but risk of increased transmission will 
vary with locality, vector, host and human factors.

DOI: 10.1016/s0020-7519(98)00053-8
PMID: 9673874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Rev Environ Health. 1997 Jul-Sep;12(3):191-9. doi: 10.1515/reveh.1997.12.3.191.

Public health impacts of global climate change.

Hales S(1), Weinstein P, Woodward A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Wellington School of Medicine, New Zealand. 
shales@wnmeds.ac.nz

Comment in
    Rev Environ Health. 2007 Oct-Dec;22(4):i-ii.

The potential health impacts of climate change are wide-ranging, from direct 
impacts at familiar local scales, through indirect effects occurring at the 
regional or ecosystem level, to long term effects on the sustainability of 
global systems. To assess these potential impacts, there is a need to broaden 
the scope of health impact assessment. Eco-epidemiology is emerging as a 
response to this need. Eco-epidemiology entails a shift in focus: from direct 
(toxicological) to indirect (ecological) mechanisms; and from effects occurring 
at 'human' temporal and geographical scales to those at regional and geophysical 
scales. We discuss the potential health impacts of climate change on each scale. 
At the global scale, interactions and feedbacks between systems are critical 
determinants of long term outcomes. From an eco-epidemiological perspective, the 
study of climate change becomes inseparable from the study of global change more 
generally.

DOI: 10.1515/reveh.1997.12.3.191
PMID: 9406290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Apr;108(4):367-76. doi: 10.1289/ehp.00108367.

The potential health impacts of climate variability and change for the United 
States: executive summary of the report of the health sector of the U.S. 
National Assessment.

Patz JA(1), McGeehin MA, Bernard SM, Ebi KL, Epstein PR, Grambsch A, Gubler DJ, 
Reither P, Romieu I, Rose JB, Samet JM, Trtanj J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Hygiene and Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. jpatz@jhsph.edu

We examined the potential impacts of climate variability and change on human 
health as part of a congressionally mandated study of climate change in the 
United States. Our author team, comprising experts from academia, government, 
and the private sector, was selected by the federal interagency U.S. Global 
Change Research Program, and this report stems from our first 18 months of work. 
For this assessment we used a set of assumptions and/or projections of future 
climates developed for all participants in the National Assessment of the 
Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and Change. We identified five 
categories of health outcomes that are most likely to be affected by climate 
change because they are associated with weather and/or climate variables: 
temperature-related morbidity and mortality; health effects of extreme weather 
events (storms, tornadoes, hurricanes, and precipitation extremes); 
air-pollution-related health effects; water- and foodborne diseases; and vector- 
and rodent-borne diseases. We concluded that the levels of uncertainty preclude 
any definitive statement on the direction of potential future change for each of 
these health outcomes, although we developed some hypotheses. Although we mainly 
addressed adverse health outcomes, we identified some positive health outcomes, 
notably reduced cold-weather mortality, which has not been extensively examined. 
We found that at present most of the U.S. population is protected against 
adverse health outcomes associated with weather and/or climate, although certain 
demographic and geographic populations are at increased risk. We concluded that 
vigilance in the maintenance and improvement of public health systems and their 
responsiveness to changing climate conditions and to identified vulnerable 
subpopulations should help to protect the U.S. population from any adverse 
health outcomes of projected climate change.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.00108367
PMCID: PMC1638004
PMID: 10753097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Med War. 1995 Oct-Dec;11(4):188-94. doi: 10.1080/07488009508409238.

Climate change and human health: possible communicable disease consequences in 
the United Kingdom.

Rowland MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Anglia and Oxford Regional Health Authority, Cambridge.

In May 1990 a 'Think Tank' was constituted in order to advise the Director of 
the Public Health Laboratory Service (PHLS) on the potential effects of global 
climatic change, and of world population increase and movements, on the 
epidemiology of infectious diseases internationally and in the United Kingdom, 
and to consider the implications for the PHLS. This article draws on the Think 
Tank deliberations and describes the scenario considered, and some of the major 
issues identified, with particular reference to the UK.

DOI: 10.1080/07488009508409238
PMID: 8559116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Med J Aust. 1995 Dec 4-18;163(11-12):570-4. doi: 
10.5694/j.1326-5377.1995.tb124754.x.

Climate change and global infectious disease threats.

Jackson EK(1).

Author information:
(1)Climate Impacts Unit, Greenpeace International, Sydney, NSW.

The world's climate is warming up and, while debate continues about how much 
change we can expect, it is becoming clear that even small changes in climate 
can have major effects on the spread of disease. Erwin K Jackson, a member of 
Greenpeace International's Climate Impacts Unit and a delegate to the 11th 
session of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Rome, 
11-15 December), reviews the scientific evidence of this new global threat to 
health.

DOI: 10.5694/j.1326-5377.1995.tb124754.x
PMID: 8538543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Lancet. 2000 Aug 5;356(9228):495-9. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)02564-2.

The changing global context of public health.

McMichael AJ(1), Beaglehole R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine, UK. t.mcmichael@LSHTM.ac.uk

Future health prospects depend increasingly on globalisation processes and on 
the impact of global environmental change. Economic globalisation--entailng 
deregulated trade and investment--is a mixed blessing for health. Economic 
growth and the dissemination of technologies have widely enhanced life 
expectancy. However, aspects of globalisation are jeopardising health by eroding 
social and environmental conditions, exacerbating the rich-poor gap, and 
disseminating consumerism. Global environmental changes reflect the growth of 
populations and the intensity of economic activity. These changes include 
altered composition of the atmosphere, land degradation, depletion of 
terrestrial aquifers and ocean fisheries, and loss of biodiversity. This 
weakening of life-supporting systems poses health risks. Contemporary public 
health must therefore encompass the interrelated tasks of reducing social and 
health inequalities and achieving health-sustaining environments.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)02564-2
PMID: 10981904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Risk Anal. 1996 Jun;16(3):377-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1539-6924.1996.tb01472.x.

Uncertainties in the link between global climate change and predicted health 
risks from pollution: hexachlorobenzene (HCB) case study using a fugacity model.

McKone TE(1), Daniels JI, Goldman M.

Author information:
(1)University of California, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 
USA.

Industrial societies have altered the earth's environment in ways that could 
have important, longterm ecological, economic, and health implications. In this 
paper, we examine the extent to which uncertainty about global climate change 
could impact the precision of predictions of secondary outcomes such as health 
impacts of pollution. Using a model that links global climate change with 
predictions of chemical exposure and human health risk in the Western region of 
the United States of America (U.S.), we define parameter variabilities and 
uncertainties and we characterize the resulting outcome variance. As a case 
study, we consider the public health consequences from releases of 
hexachlorobenzene (HCB), a ubiquitous multimedia pollutant. By constructing a 
matrix that links global environmental change both directly and indirectly to 
potential human-health effects attributable to HCB released into air, soil, and 
water, we define critical parameter variances in the health risk estimation 
process. We employ a combined uncertainty/sensitivity analysis to investigate 
how HCB releases are affected by increasing atmospheric temperature and the 
accompanying climate alterations that are anticipated. We examine how such 
uncertainty impacts both the expected magnitude and calculational precision of 
potential human exposures and health effects. This assessment reveals that 
uncertain temperature increases of up to 5 degrees C have little impact on 
either the magnitude or precision of the public-health consequences estimated 
under existing climate variations for HCB released into air and water in the 
Western region of the U.S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1539-6924.1996.tb01472.x
PMID: 8693163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Prev Med. 1998 Jan-Feb;27(1):111-9. doi: 10.1006/pmed.1997.0253.

Worksite health and safety climate: scale development and effects of a health 
promotion intervention.

Basen-Engquist K(1), Hudmon KS, Tripp M, Chamberlain R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Science, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Environmental influences on health and health behavior have an 
important place in research on worksite health promotion. We tested the validity 
and internal consistency of a new measure of organizational health and safety 
climate that was used in a large randomized trial of a worksite cancer 
prevention program (the Working Well Trial). The resulting scales then were 
applied to assess intervention effects.
METHODS: This study uses data from a subset of 40 worksites in the Working Well 
Trial. Employees at 20 natural gas pipeline worksite and 20 rural electrical 
cooperatives completed a cross-sectional questionnaire at baseline and 3-year 
follow-up.
RESULTS: A factor analysis of this self-report instrument produced a two-factor 
solution. The resulting health and safety climate scales had good internal 
consistency (Cronbach's alpha = 0.74 and 0.82, respectively) and concurrent 
validity. The health climate scale was correlated more highly with 
organizational measures that were indicative of a supportive health climate than 
those indicating supportive safety climate, while the reverse was true of the 
safety climate scale. Changes in health climate were associated with the number 
of smoking and smokeless tobacco programs offered at the worksites at the time 
of the 3-year follow-up (r = 0.46 and 0.42, respectively). The scales were not 
correlated with most employee health behaviors. The health climate scores 
increased at intervention worksites, compared with scores at control worksites 
(F[1,36] = 7.57, P = 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: The health and safety climate scales developed for this study 
provide useful instruments for measuring organizational change related to 
worksite health promotion activities. The Working Well Intervention resulted in 
a significant improvement in worksite health climate.

DOI: 10.1006/pmed.1997.0253
PMID: 9465361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Med War. 1995 Oct-Dec;11(4):202-13. doi: 10.1080/07488009508409240.

Climate change and malaria: exploring the risks.

Martens WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, University of Limburg, The Netherlands.

That the enhanced greenhouse effect may prove to influence human health will 
come as no surprise. One of the potential health consequences is a change in 
distribution patterns of vector-borne diseases. In tropical countries, such 
diseases are a major cause of illness and death. One of the most important 
vector-borne diseases in the world is malaria, which is associated with one of 
four species of parasite and transmitted by a mosquito vector. Climatic 
conditions, and temperature in particular, directly influence mosquito 
development, feeding-frequency and longevity of the mosquito, as well as the 
time in which the parasite develops inside the mosquito. Other environmental 
factors such as vegetation and breeding sites are indirectly influenced by 
climate conditions. In order to assess the impact of an anthropogenic climate 
change on the transmission of malaria, an integrated assessment model has been 
developed. In this integrated model, the direct effects of a change in 
temperature and precipitation on the transmission potential of a mosquito 
population is assessed by means of the vectorial capacity. The effect of a 
human-induced climate change on human health is evaluated by assessing the 
change in malaria prevalence and disease burden. A sustainable development 
index, which is an aggregate of an environmental pressure indicator, a health 
indicator and a socio-economic development indicator is introduced and 
discussed. Such an index can be used to determine whether future projections are 
sustainable.

DOI: 10.1080/07488009508409240
PMID: 8559118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Environ Health Perspect. 1999 May;107(5):329-37. doi: 10.1289/ehp.99107329.

An integrated assessment framework for climate change and infectious diseases.

Chan NY(1), Ebi KL, Smith F, Wilson TF, Smith AE.

Author information:
(1)Talus Solutions, Inc., Mountain View, CA 94041 USA.

Many potential human health effects have been hypothesized to result either 
directly or indirectly from global climate change. Changes in the prevalence and 
spread of infectious diseases are some of the most widely cited potential 
effects of climate change, and could have significant consequences for human 
health as well as economic and societal impacts. These changes in disease 
incidence would be mediated through biologic, ecologic, sociologic, and 
epidemiologic processes that interact with each other and which may themselves 
be influenced by climate change. Although hypothesized infectious disease 
effects have been widely discussed, there have not yet been thorough 
quantitative studies addressing the many processes at work. In part this is 
because of the complexity of the many indirect and feedback interactions or 
mechanisms that bear on all aspects of the climate issue. It also results from 
the difficulty of including the multitude of always-changing determinants of 
these diseases. This paper proposes a framework for an integrated assessment of 
the impacts of climate change on infectious diseases. The framework allows 
identification of potentially important indirect interactions or mechanisms, 
identification of important research gaps, and a means of integrating targeted 
research from a variety of disciplines into an enhanced understanding of the 
whole system.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.99107329
PMCID: PMC1566428
PMID: 10210687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1996 Jan;70(1):115-26. doi: 10.1037//0022-3514.70.1.115.

Motivational predictors of weight loss and weight-loss maintenance.

Williams GC(1), Grow VM, Freedman ZR, Ryan RM, Deci EL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Rochester, New York 14627, USA.

Self-determination theory proposes that behavior change will occur and persist 
if it is autonomously motivated. Autonomous motivation for a behavior is 
theorized to be a function both of individual differences in the autonomy 
orientation from the General Causality Orientations Scale and of the degree of 
autonomy supportiveness of relevant social contexts. We tested the theory with 
128 patients in a 6-month, very-low-calorie weight-loss program with a 23-month 
follow-up. Analyses confirmed the predictions that (a) participants whose 
motivation for weight loss was more autonomous would attend the program more 
regularly, lose more weight during the program, and evidence greater maintained 
weight loss at follow-up, and (b) participants' autonomous motivation for weight 
loss would be predicted both by their autonomy orientation and by the perceived 
autonomy supportiveness of the interpersonal climate created by the health-care 
staff.

DOI: 10.1037//0022-3514.70.1.115
PMID: 8558405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Soc Sci Med. 1998 Feb;46(3):331-44. doi: 10.1016/s0277-9536(97)00162-7.

Climate change, thermal stress and mortality changes.

Martens WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Maastricht University, Department of Mathematics, The Netherlands.

One of the potential effects of an anthropogenically induced climate change is a 
change in mortality related to thermal stress. In this paper, existing 
literature on the relationship between average temperatures and mortality is 
evaluated. By means of a simple meta-analysis an aggregated effect of a change 
in temperature on mortality is estimated for total, cardiovascular and 
respiratory mortality. These effect estimates are combined with projections of 
changes in baseline climate conditions of 20 cities, according to climate change 
scenarios of three General Circulation Models (GCMs). The results indicate that 
for most of the cities included, global climate change is likely to lead to a 
reduction in mortality rates due to decreasing winter mortality. This effect is 
most pronounced for cardiovascular mortality in elderly people in cities which 
experience temperate or cold climates at present. The sensitivity of the results 
to physiological and socio-economical adaptation is examined. However, more 
research is necessary to extend this work by inclusion of data from a wider 
range of populations.

DOI: 10.1016/s0277-9536(97)00162-7
PMID: 9460815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Vet J. 2000 Sep;160(2):107-17. doi: 10.1053/tvjl.2000.0470.

Climate change: effects on culicoides--transmitted viruses and implications for 
the UK.

Wittmann EJ(1), Baylis M.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, Pirbright, UK.

Comment in
    Vet J. 2000 Sep;160(2):87-9.

Changes in the distribution and abundance of insects are likely to be amongst 
the most important and immediate effects of climate change. We review here the 
risk that climate change poses to the UK's livestock industry via effects on 
Culicoides biting midges, the vectors of several arboviruses, including those 
that cause bluetongue (BT) and African horse sickness (AHS). The major old-world 
vector of BT and AHS viruses, C. imicola, occurs in southern Europe and will 
spread further north as global temperatures increase. It is unlikely, however, 
that in the foreseeable future it will reach and become established in the UK. 
As the distribution of C. imicola moves north, however, it may bring BT and AHS 
viruses into the range of other Culicoides species that are known to be 
competent vectors and which occur much further north. Once infected via this 
'baton effect', these species may be able to spread the viruses over much of 
Europe, including the UK. Climate change may increase their vector competence 
further and will also increase the likelihood of viruses surviving from one year 
to the next. An additional risk is that the predicted increase in the frequency 
of short periods of hot temperatures may lead to the creation of novel vector 
species, by removing the barriers that in colder conditions make them refractory 
to viral infection.

Copyright 2000 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

DOI: 10.1053/tvjl.2000.0470
PMID: 10985802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Ann Trop Med Parasitol. 1996 Dec;90(6):573-88. doi: 
10.1080/00034983.1996.11813087.

Climate change and malaria transmission.

Lindsay SW(1), Birley MH.

Author information:
(1)Danish Bilharziasis Laboratory, Charlottenlund.

There is a consensus among climatologists that our planet is experiencing a 
progressive rise in surface temperature due to the increased production of 
"greenhouse" gases. Some of the possible consequences of elevated temperature on 
malaria transmission are examined in the present review. A simple mathematical 
model is first used to examine the effect of temperature on the ability of 
Anopheles maculipennis to transmit vivax malaria. This indicates that small 
increases in temperature at low temperatures may increase the risk of 
transmission substantially. This is important, since vulnerable communities, 
poorly protected by health services, in areas of unstable or no malaria are 
likely to be at increased risk of future outbreaks. In contrast, areas of stable 
transmission may be little affected by rising temperature. It is thought that 
global warming will lead to coastal flooding, changes in precipitation and, 
indirectly, changes in land use. Just how these changes will effect transmission 
at a regional level requires an understanding of the ecology of local vectors, 
since environmental changes which favour malaria transmission in one vector 
species may reduce it in another. Methods for predicting future changes in 
malaria in different regions are discussed, highlighting the need for further 
research in this area. Most importantly, there is a need for researchers to 
validate the accuracy of the models used for predicting malaria and to confirm 
the assumptions on which the models are based.

DOI: 10.1080/00034983.1996.11813087
PMID: 9039269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Environ Health Perspect. 1991 Dec;96:171-4. doi: 10.1289/ehp.9196171.

Global climate change and infectious diseases.

Shope R(1).

Author information:
(1)Yale Arbovirus Research Unit, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT 06510.

The effects of global climate change on infectious diseases are hypothetical 
until more is known about the degree of change in temperature and humidity that 
will occur. Diseases most likely to increase in their distribution and severity 
have three-factor (agent, vector, and human being) and four-factor (plus 
vertebrate reservoir host) ecology. Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus 
mosquitoes may move northward and have more rapid metamorphosis with global 
warming. These mosquitoes transmit dengue virus, and Aedes aegypti transmits 
yellow fever virus. The faster metamorphosis and a shorter extrinsic incubation 
of dengue and yellow fever viruses could lead to epidemics in North America. 
Vibrio cholerae is harbored persistently in the estuaries of the U.S. Gulf 
Coast. Over the past 200 years, cholera has become pandemic seven times with 
spread from Asia to Europe, Africa, and North America. Global warming may lead 
to changes in water ecology that could enhance similar spread of cholera in 
North America. Some other infectious diseases such as LaCrosse encephalitis and 
Lyme disease are caused by agents closely dependent on the integrity of their 
environment. These diseases may become less prominent with global warming 
because of anticipated modification of their habitats. Ecological studies will 
help us to understand more fully the possible consequences of global warming. 
New and more effective methods for control of vectors will be needed.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.9196171
PMCID: PMC1568225
PMID: 1820262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Rev Environ Health. 1999 Apr-Jun;14(2):91-102. doi: 10.1515/reveh.1999.14.2.91.

Climate change and its potential impacts on the Gulf Coast region of the United 
States.

Tchounwou PB(1).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Science Ph.D. Program, School of Science and Technology, 
Jackson State University, Mississippi 39217, USA. paul@stallion.jsums.edu

The Gulf Coast region of the United States abuts five states, including Alabama, 
Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas. In general, the Gulf of Mexico has a 
surface area of 1.63 million square kilometers (630,000 square miles) and a 
watershed area of 4.69 million square kilometers (1.81 million square miles) in 
the United States. This region is one of the nation's largest ecological systems 
and is closely linked to a significant portion of the nation's economy. In the 
Gulf Coast region, energy, fisheries, agriculture, and tourism rank among the 
most significant sectors of the economy. The Gulf has five of the top ten 
fishing ports in the United States, and commercial fisheries in the Gulf 
annually produce nearly 2 billion tons of fish, oysters, shrimps, and crabs. 
Gulf ports handle one-half of the nation's import-export tonnage. Petroleum 
produced in the Gulf represents about 80% of the nation's offshore production. 
The Gulf Coast region largely relies on many natural resources to fuel many 
important sectors of its economy. But nevertheless, the health and vitality of 
the Gulf have declined in recent years, caused in part by increasing populations 
along its coast and the growing demand upon its resources and in part by the 
accumulation of years of careless depletion, abuse, and neglect of the 
environment. Equally important are the impacts of natural and human-induced 
climate change on the economy and on the quality of life for millions of people 
living in the Gulf Coast region. The results have generated alarming increases 
in damage to and destruction of the ecosystems and habitats of the Gulf. This 
paper reviews the nature of global environmental change and addresses the 
potential health and environmental impacts that may occur in the Gulf Coast 
region of the United States as a consequence of various environmental 
alterations resulting from global change.

DOI: 10.1515/reveh.1999.14.2.91
PMID: 10485132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Med War. 1995 Oct-Dec;11(4):214-22. doi: 10.1080/07488009508409241.

The climate change convention and human health.

Rowbotham EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)CSERGE, University of East Anglia.

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, signed at Rio in June 
1992, is intended to minimize climate change and its impact. Much of its text is 
ambiguous and it is not specifically directed to health considerations. It is, 
however, recognized that adverse effects of climate change on health are a 
concern of humankind, and health is an integral part of the Convention. The 
Convention includes commitments by the developed countries to reduce emissions 
of greenhouse gases and to increase public awareness of these commitments. The 
significance of the Convention in these respects is discussed critically and 
future developments considered.

DOI: 10.1080/07488009508409241
PMID: 8559119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Experientia. 1993 Nov 15;49(11):969-79. doi: 10.1007/BF02125644.

The impact of climate change on human health: some international implications.

Kalkstein LS(1), Smoyer KE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geography, University of Delaware, Newark 19716.

The objective of this study is to discuss the potential impact of a global 
warming on various aspects of human health. Changes in heat-related mortality 
are estimated for four countries: the United States, Canada, the People's 
Republic of China and Egypt. In addition, the potential confounding impact of 
increased air pollution is considered. Finally, a framework to analyze two 
vector-borne diseases, onchocerciasis and malaria, which may spread if 
temperatures increase, is discussed. Our findings suggest that heat-related 
mortality is estimated to rise significantly in all four countries if the earth 
warms, with the greatest impacts in China and Egypt. The most sensitive areas 
are those with intense but irregular heat waves. In the United States, air 
pollution does not appear to impact daily mortality significantly when severe 
weather is present, although it seems to have a slight influence when weather 
conditions are not stressful.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02125644
PMID: 8253171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Environ Health Perspect. 1991 Dec;96:167-70. doi: 10.1289/ehp.9196167.

Biological diversity, ecology, and global climate change.

Jutro PR(1).

Author information:
(1)Office of Research and Development, United States Environmental Protection 
Agency, Washington, DC 20460.

Worldwide climate change and loss of biodiversity are issues of global scope and 
importance that have recently become subjects of considerable public concern. 
Unlike classical public health issues and many environmental issues, their 
perceived threat lies in their potential to disrupt ecological functioning and 
stability rather than from any direct threat that may pose to human health. Over 
the last 5 years, the international scientific community and the general public 
have become aware of the implications that atmospheric warming might have for 
world climate patterns and the resulting changes in the persistence, location, 
and composition of ecosystems worldwide. At the same time, awareness of the 
magnitude of current and impending losses of the world's biological diversity 
has increased. Human activities are currently responsible for a species loss 
rate that is the most extreme in millions of years, and an alarmingly increasing 
rate of transformation and fragmentation of natural landscapes. We are just 
beginning to grasp the meaning of this loss in terms of opportunity costs to 
human society and the less quantifiable losses associated with simplification of 
natural ecosystems. In the case of both global warming and reduction of 
biological diversity, man is affecting nature in an unprecedented fashion, on a 
global scale, and with unpredictable and frequently irreversible results.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.9196167
PMCID: PMC1568253
PMID: 1820260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Int J Biometeorol. 1995 Mar;38(3):141-7. doi: 10.1007/BF01208491.

The potential effects of climate change on winter mortality in England and 
Wales.

Langford IH(1), Bentham G.

Author information:
(1)Health Policy and Practice Unit, School of Health and Social Work, University 
of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.

In Britain death rates from several important causes, particularly circulatory 
and respiratory diseases, rise markedly during the colder winter months. This 
close association between temperature and mortality suggests that climate change 
as a result of global warming may lead to a future reduction in excess winter 
deaths. This paper gives a brief introductory review of the literature on the 
links between cold conditions and health, and statistical models are 
subsequently developed of the associations between temperature and monthly 
mortality rates for the years 1968 to 1988 for England and Wales. Other factors, 
particularly the occurrence of influenza epidemics, are also taken into account. 
Highly significant negative associations were found between temperature and 
death rates from all causes and from chronic bronchitis, pneumonia, ischaemic 
heart disease and cerebrovascular disease. The statistical models developed from 
this analysis were used to compare death rates for current conditions with those 
that might be expected to occur in a future warmer climate. The results indicate 
that the higher temperatures predicted for 2050 might result in nearly 9000 
fewer winter deaths each year with the largest contribution being from mortality 
from ischaemic heart disease. However, these preliminary estimates might change 
when further research is able to make into account a number of additional 
factors affecting the relationship between mortality and climate.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01208491
PMID: 7744529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Int J Parasitol. 1998 Jun;28(6):935-45. doi: 10.1016/s0020-7519(98)00056-3.

Implications of global change and climate variability for vector-borne diseases: 
generic approaches to impact assessments.

Sutherst RW(1).

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Entomology, Long Pocket Laboratories, Indooroopilly, Queensland, 
Australia. R.Sutherst@ctpm.uq.edu.au

Global change is pervasive and occurring at a dramatic rate. It involves changes 
in land use, vegetation cover, species translocations and even the climate of 
the planet. The consequences for the biosphere are uncertain. Past research 
emphasis has been on the science of climate change as the major driver of 
policy. The present priority in the global-change community is to define the 
likely nature and extent of those impacts on biodiversity and the functioning of 
ecosystems. In addition, increasing consideration is now being given to 
adaptation measures. The way in which that is being initiated is to develop 
adaptation measures to respond to medium-term climate variability in the form of 
altered El Nino and similar cycles, and changes in the frequency of extreme 
events. Given the large number of stakeholders in agriculture, human health and 
environment, there is a need for great efficiencies if the scientific community 
is going to be able to respond in a meaningful way with foreseeable resources. 
The plethora of problems means that generic approaches are needed. The present 
situation, with parasitologists each doing their own thing in terms of 
developing and using software tools, is like the tower of Babel. Parasitologists 
need common tools and languages to facilitate communication and collaboration. 
Advances in computing, with object-oriented programming languages and seamless 
exchange of information between different packages and platforms, are providing 
some exciting opportunities to overcome these problems.

DOI: 10.1016/s0020-7519(98)00056-3
PMID: 9673872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Aust N Z J Ment Health Nurs. 1998 Sep;7(3):86-94.

Developing advanced mental health nursing practice: a process of change.

Crowe M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, Christchurch School of Medicine, New 
Zealand.

In the current economic climate of restructuring and rationalization it is 
important for mental health nurses to define their realm of expertise in order 
to demonstrate professional accountability and to validate their position in 
relation to unqualified but cheaper caregivers. If mental health nurses are to 
act in the best interests of patients and the community, they need to challenge 
current trends in health-care delivery that are preoccupied with economic 
efficiency and lack of consideration of broader social issues. To substantiate 
mental health nursing practice and defend against the undermining of clinical 
expertise by policies and service delivery that advances economic interests, 
mental health nurses need to corroborate their claims to expertise by 
articulating a patient-centred rationale for their practice. The ideas presented 
in this paper have evolved through the development of two postgraduate 
programmes for advanced mental health nursing practice--one in Australia at 
Griffith University and the other in New Zealand at the Department of 
Psychological Medicine, Christchurch School of Medicine.

PMID: 9807265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Environ Health Perspect. 1995 May;103(5):458-64. doi: 10.1289/ehp.95103458.

Potential impact of global climate change on malaria risk.

Martens WJ(1), Niessen LW, Rotmans J, Jetten TH, McMichael AJ.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection, Bilthoven, 
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Environ Health Perspect. 1995 Dec;103(12):1081.

The biological activity and geographic distribution of the malarial parasite and 
its vector are sensitive to climatic influences, especially temperature and 
precipitation. We have incorporated General Circulation Model-based scenarios of 
anthropogenic global climate change in an integrated linked-system model for 
predicting changes in malaria epidemic potential in the next century. The 
concept of the disability-adjusted life years is included to arrive at a single 
measure of the effect of anthropogenic climate change on the health impact of 
malaria. Assessment of the potential impact of global climate change on the 
incidence of malaria suggests a widespread increase of risk due to expansion of 
the areas suitable for malaria transmission. This predicted increase is most 
pronounced at the borders of endemic malaria areas and at higher altitudes 
within malarial areas. The incidence of infection is sensitive to climate 
changes in areas of Southeast Asia, South America, and parts of Africa where the 
disease is less endemic; in these regions the numbers of years of healthy life 
lost may increase significantly. However, the simulated changes in malaria risk 
must be interpreted on the basis of local environmental conditions, the effects 
of socioeconomic developments, and malaria control programs or capabilities.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.95103458
PMCID: PMC1523278
PMID: 7656875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Int J Epidemiol. 1994 Oct;23(5):873-85. doi: 10.1093/ije/23.5.873.

Stratospheric ozone and health.

Armstrong BK(1).

Author information:
(1)Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, Canberra.

BACKGROUND: Stratospheric ozone is being depleted and ambient ultraviolet (UV) 
irradiance is probably increasing. While remedial steps have been taken through 
the Montreal protocols, at best it will take some 90 years for stratospheric 
ozone concentrations to return to the levels existing in the 1970s.
METHODS: The evidence that these changes may have harmful effects on health has 
been reviewed.
RESULTS: The direct harmful effects are skin cancer, ocular damage and, 
possibly, immune suppression with an increase in infectious disease. Indirect, 
harmful effects resulting from climate change, changes in atmospheric chemistry, 
and changes in food supply may also occur. Beneficial effects are also possible 
but have largely escaped attention. Quantification of these effects is either 
uncertain or impossible at present and the outcomes for health in 50 years time 
can only be guessed at.
CONCLUSIONS: To understand better the health consequence of stratospheric ozone 
depletion, we need to know the quantitative relationship between ambient UV 
radiation and skin cancer, whether or not UV radiation really causes cataract 
and other ocular effects and what the quantitative relationships are, whether 
effects of UV radiation on immune function produce detectable health 
consequences, whether there are important beneficial effects of increasing UV 
radiation and, ultimately, what the balance of all these effects might be on 
health on a global scale.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/23.5.873
PMID: 7860166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Annu Rev Public Health. 2000;21:271-307. doi: 
10.1146/annurev.publhealth.21.1.271.

The effects of changing weather on public health.

Patz JA(1), Engelberg D, Last J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2179, USA. jpatz@jhsp.edu

Many diseases are influenced by weather conditions or display strong 
seasonality, suggestive of a possible climatic contribution. Projections of 
future climate change have, therefore, compelled health scientists to re-examine 
weather/disease relationships. There are three projected physical consequences 
of climate change: temperature rise, sea level rise, and extremes in the 
hydrologic cycle. This century, the Earth has warmed by about 0.5 degrees 
centigrade, and the mid-range estimates of future temperature change and sea 
level rise are 2.0 degrees centigrade and 49 centimeters, respectively, by the 
year 2100. Extreme weather variability associated with climate change may 
especially add an important new stress to developing nations that are already 
vulnerable as a result of environmental degradation, resource depletion, 
overpopulation, or location (e.g. low-lying coastal deltas). The regional 
impacts of climate change will vary widely depending on existing population 
vulnerability. Health outcomes of climate change can be grouped into those of: 
(a) direct physical consequences, e.g. heat mortality or drowning; (b) 
physical/chemical sequelae, e.g. atmospheric transport and formation of air 
pollutants; (c) physical/biological consequences, e.g. response of vector- and 
waterborne diseases, and food production; and (d) sociodemographic impacts, e.g. 
climate or environmentally induced migration or population dislocation. Better 
understanding of the linkages between climate variability as a determinant of 
disease will be important, among other key factors, in constructing predictive 
models to guide public health prevention.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.21.1.271
PMID: 10884955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Lancet. 1997 Nov 8;350(9088):1341-9.

Short-term improvements in public health from global-climate policies on 
fossil-fuel combustion: an interim report. Working Group on Public Health and 
Fossil-Fuel Combustion.

[No authors listed]

BACKGROUND: Most public-health assessments of climate-control policies have 
focused on long-term impacts of global change. Our interdisciplinary working 
group assesses likely short-term impacts on public health.
METHODS: We combined models of energy consumption, carbon emissions, and 
associated atmospheric particulate-matter (PM) concentration under two different 
forecasts: business-as-usual (BAU); and a hypothetical climate-policy scenario, 
where developed and developing countries undertake significant reductions in 
carbon emissions.
FINDINGS: We predict that by 2020, 700,000 avoidable deaths (90% CI 
385,000-1,034,000) will occur annually as a result of additional PM exposure 
under the BAU forecasts when compared with the climate-policy scenario. From 
2000 to 2020, the cumulative impact on public health related to the difference 
in PM exposure could total 8 million deaths globally (90% CI 4.4-11.9 million). 
In the USA alone, the avoidable number of annual deaths from PM exposure in 2020 
(without climate-change-control policy) would equal in magnitude deaths 
associated with human immunodeficiency diseases or all liver diseases in 1995.
INTERPRETATION: The mortality estimates are indicative of the magnitude of the 
likely health benefits of the climate-policy scenario examined and are not 
precise predictions of avoidable deaths. While characterized by considerable 
uncertainty, the short-term public-health impacts of reduced PM exposures 
associated with greenhouse-gas reductions are likely to be substantial even 
under the most conservative set of assumptions.

PMID: 9365447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Science. 2000 Sep 8;289(5485):1697-8.

Climate change and malaria: temperatures without fevers?

Dye C(1), Reiter P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Communicable Diseases Control, Prevention and Eradication, 
World Health Organization (WHO), 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland. dyec@who.ch

Comment on
    Science. 2000 Sep 8;289(5485):1763-6.

As the world gets warmer, the predictions about the spread of vector-based 
diseases such as malaria get gloomier. However, in their timely Perspective, Dye 
and Reiter explain the implications of a new climate model (Randolph and 
Rogers), which predicts that the distribution of malaria is unlikely to change 
dramatically in the next 50 years even if the world does get hotter.

PMID: 11001735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Br Med Bull. 1998;54(2):475-88. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.bmb.a011702.

Impacts of global environmental change on future health and health care in 
tropical countries.

McMichael AJ(1), Patz J, Kovats RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine, UK.

The aggregate human impact on the environment now exceeds the limits of 
absorption or regeneration of various major biophysical systems, at global and 
regional levels. The resultant global environmental changes include altered 
atmospheric composition, widespread land degradation, depletion of fisheries, 
freshwater shortages, and biodiversity losses. The drive for further social and 
economic development, plus an unavoidable substantial increase in population 
size by 2050--especially in less developed countries--will tend to augment these 
large-scale environmental problems. Disturbances of the Earth's life-support 
systems (the source of climatic stability, food, freshwater, and robust 
ecosystems) will affect disproportionately the resource-poor and geographically 
vulnerable populations in many tropical countries. Ecological disturbances will 
alter the pattern of various pests and pathogens in plants, livestock and 
humans. Overall, these large-scale environmental changes are likely to increase 
the range and seasonality of various (especially vector-borne) infectious 
diseases, food insecurity, of water stress, and of population displacement with 
its various adverse health consequences.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.bmb.a011702
PMID: 9830211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Med War. 1995 Oct-Dec;11(4):195-201. doi: 10.1080/07488009508409239.

Conceptual and methodological challenges in predicting the health impacts of 
climate change.

McMichael AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Population Sciences, London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine.

Describing (not to mention quantifying) the anticipated adverse health impacts 
of global climate change poses basic challenges to biomedical science. First and 
foremost, it is beset with uncertainties and complexities; it is necessarily an 
'If-Then' exercise, that takes as given climatologists' estimates of the 
plausible range of greenhouse-induced climate change over the coming century. 
The health impacts of climate change would generally not occur via the familiar 
direct-acting mechanisms that characterise local environmentally-induced 
toxicology or pathophysiology; therefore they would lack the mechanistic 
directness-of-effect that epidemiological research methods are best equipped to 
study. Rather, the health impacts would occur on a larger scale, and would 
result predominantly from perturbations of natural biogeochemical systems that 
reduce Earth's capacity for life support. Therefore, scientists will need to 
address the assessment of impacts within an ecological framework, and with an 
unusually long time horizon. This assessment requires a new capacity for 
systems-based thinking, predictive modelling, and dealing with uncertainty. 
Scientists, policy-makers and general public will have to adjust to unfamiliar 
styles of 'anticipatory' science, with an unusual overlay of uncertainty and 
provisionality.

DOI: 10.1080/07488009508409239
PMID: 8559117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Health Hum Serv Adm. 1998 Spring;20(4):442-67.

The Australian health system: continuity and change.

Harris MG(1), Harris RD.

Author information:
(1)University of Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.

The health of Australians, with the exception of Aboriginals and Torres Strait 
Islanders, compares favourably with other industrialised nations. Since 1984, 
universal access for citizens to medical and public hospital services has been 
achieved under a national Health Insurance Scheme called Medicare, partially 
funded by a 1.4 percent levy on all taxpayers. Medicare found early widespread 
support from the electorate but continues to be buffeted by a minority coalition 
of some medical associations, private health insurers, and conservative 
"libertarian" politicians. Over the decade since its inception, Medicare has 
provided stability in maintaining total health costs around 8 percent of GDP. 
This has been largely due to capping hospital costs via Commonwealth-State 
agreements. Medicare has failed in the past five years to contain medical costs 
which have increased proportionally with increases in the medical workforce. 
This article examines the structure and performance of Medicare and its role 
within Australia's overall health system. Benefits of a universal access 
insurance program are outlined together with challenges associated with 
inequities in health status, geography, aging of the population, burgeoning 
technology, ideological diversity, and an economic climate requiring cost 
containment and favouring privatisation and the role of the market. It can be 
concluded that, despite these challenges, universal access to health care is 
here to stay. Australia's Medicare program has become popular with the 
electorate.

PMID: 10338721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Acad Med. 2000 Jun;75(6):575-94. doi: 10.1097/00001888-200006000-00006.

Curricular change in medical schools: how to succeed.

Bland CJ(1), Starnaman S, Wersal L, Moorehead-Rosenberg L, Zonia S, Henry R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Practice and Community Health, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, Minneapolis 55455-0392, USA. bland001@tc.umn.edu

Society's changing needs, advancing knowledge, and innovations in education 
require constant changes of medical school curricula. But successful curricular 
change occurs only through the dedicated efforts of effective change agents. 
This study systematically searched and synthesized the literature on educational 
curricular change (at all levels of instruction), as well as organizational 
change, to provide guidance for those who direct curricular change initiatives 
in medical schools. The focus was on the process of planning, implementing, and 
institutionalizing curricular change efforts; thus, only those articles that 
dealt with examining the change process and articulating the factors that 
promote or inhibit change efforts were included. In spite of the highly diverse 
literature reviewed, a consistent set of characteristics emerged as being 
associated with successful curricular change. The frequent reappearance of the 
same characteristics in the varied fields and settings suggests they are robust 
contributors to successful change. Specifically, the characteristics are in the 
areas of the organization's mission and goals, history of change in the 
organization, politics (internal networking, resource allocation, relationship 
with the external environment), organizational structure, need for change, scope 
and complexity of the innovation, cooperative climate, participation by the 
organization's members, communication, human resource development (training, 
incorporating new members, reward structure), evaluation, performance dip (i.e., 
the temporary decrease in an organization's performance as a new program is 
implemented), and leadership. These characteristics are discussed in detail and 
related specifically to curricular change in medical school settings.

DOI: 10.1097/00001888-200006000-00006
PMID: 10875502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Ann Intern Med. 1990 Sep 15;113(6):467-73. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-113-6-467.

Medical responsibility and global environmental change.

McCally M(1), Cassel CK.

Author information:
(1)Pritzker School of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 1991 Jan 15;114(2):170-1.
    Ann Intern Med. 1990 Dec 15;113(12):996.

Global environmental change threatens the habitability of the planet and the 
health of its inhabitants. Toxic pollution of air and water, acid rain, 
destruction of stratospheric ozone, waste, species extinction and, potentially, 
global warming are produced by the growing numbers and activities of human 
beings. Progression of these environmental changes could lead to unprecedented 
human suffering. Physicians can treat persons experiencing the consequences of 
environmental change but cannot individually prevent the cause of their 
suffering. Physicians have information and expertise about environmental change 
that can contribute to its slowing or prevention. Work to prevent global 
environmental change is consistent with the social responsibility of physicians 
and other health professionals.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-113-6-467
PMID: 2288576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Ther Drug Monit. 2000 Feb;22(1):58-60. doi: 10.1097/00007691-200002000-00012.

Aquatic toxicology.

Moore MR(1), Shaw G.

Author information:
(1)National Research Centre for Environmental Toxicology & Queensland Health 
Scientific Services, University of Queensland, Archerfield, Australia.

Australia is blessed with a great diversity of unique species in its fresh 
waters and in the marine environment around its coast. There is evidence that 
human and natural events are impacting on these species. Such impacts are 
associated with various agricultural, industrial, and domestic practices and 
with natural and anthropogenically driven climate change. Among the species most 
affected are those living in aquatic and marine environments. Some of these, 
such as cyanobacteria and dinoflagellates, have the potential for toxicity. 
Linked to this, there is the potential benefit of harnessing the pharmacologic 
potential of these toxins.

DOI: 10.1097/00007691-200002000-00012
PMID: 10688260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nurs Ethics. 1996 Mar;3(1):53-63. doi: 10.1177/096973309600300107.

Ethics education and nursing practice.

Scott PA.

This paper suggests that a consideration of health care practice is a necessary 
step in gaining insight into the appropriate composition of an ethics course for 
students in the health care professional. Health care practice, if it responds 
to the needs of society, is dynamic in nature. In the current climate of change 
in the health service, the author suggests that the nursing profession needs to 
become more proactive in analysing and attempting to determine the future shape 
of nursing. To protect patient care the nursing profession needs to have its 
eyes open to the ethical dimensions of changes in role and practice. The author 
argues that, in attempting to ensure that the education to which nursing 
students are exposed is of relevance, it is necessary to introduce an element of 
the ideal into the ethics component of their professional education. From early 
on in their professional development students should be aware of the scope and 
standards of practice, and the type of role enactment to which the profession 
requires them to aspire.

DOI: 10.1177/096973309600300107
PMID: 8696863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Backgr Notes Ser. 1989 Mar:1-8.

Australia.

United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public Affairs.

PIP: The smallest continent and one of the largest countries, Australia is a 
country of diverse geographical conditions and differing cultures of people 
unified by one predominant language and political system. Mountains, desert and 
rivers are some of the varying landscape features of Australia, although the 
climate and condition for most of the country is tropical. Original Australians, 
a hunting-gathering people called Aborigines, came to Australia over 38,000 
years ago. Today the Aborigines compose about 1% of the population and live in 
traditional tribal areas as well as cities. The 1st European settlement came in 
1788 from Great Britain. After World War II, the population doubled. Although 
the population is primarily composed of British and Irish immigrants, immigrants 
from other European countries such as Italy and Greece as well as refugees from 
Indochina, Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos are a significant factor to the growing 
Australian population. Australian and Aboriginal culture has took hold and took 
notice in the areas of opera, art, literature and film. The Australian 
Commonwealth is based on a constitution similar to that of the United States 
government. The National Parliament is bicameral with both the Senate and the 
House of Representatives having a select number of elected officials from each 
state and territory. The Australian economy is predominantly reliant on the sale 
of mineral and agricultural exports. History, economic changes, defense, 
international relations and notes to the traveler are also discussed in this 
overview of Australia.

PMID: 12177993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Bull World Health Organ. 1998;76(1):33-45.

Malaria in the African highlands: past, present and future.

Lindsay SW(1), Martens WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Durham, England.

Many of the first European settlers in Africa sought refuge from the heat and 
diseases of the plains by moving to the cool and salubrious highlands. Although 
many of the highlands were originally malaria free, there has been a progressive 
rise in the incidence of the disease over the last 50 years, largely as a 
consequence of agroforestry development, and it has been exacerbated by scarce 
health resources. In these areas of fringe transmission where the malaria 
pattern is unstable, epidemics may be precipitated by relatively subtle climatic 
changes. Since there is little immunity against the disease in these 
communities, outbreaks can be devastating, resulting in a substantial increase 
in morbidity and death among both children and adults. We present here the 
results obtained using a mathematical model designed to identify these 
epidemic-prone regions in the African highlands and the differences expected to 
occur as a result of projected global climate change. These highlands should be 
recognized as an area of special concern. We further recommend that a regional 
modelling approach should be adopted to assess the extent and severity of this 
problem and help improve disease surveillance and the quality of health care 
delivered in this unstable ecosystem.

PIP: This article explores the past, present and future trends of malaria in the 
African highlands. Over the last 50 years, there has been a progressive increase 
in the incidence of malaria in the region, particularly in the highlands. This 
trend is brought primarily as a consequence of agroforestry development and the 
scarcity of health resources. In these areas of fringe transmission where 
malaria pattern is unstable, outbreaks may be precipitated by certain climate 
and biological factors that favors the growth and development of mosquito vector 
and parasite. Since there is little immunity against the disease in these 
communities, epidemics can be devastating, resulting in a significant rise in 
morbidity and mortality among children and adults. This paper outlines the 
results using a mathematical model designed to determine epidemic-prone regions 
in the African highlands and the differences that are expected to occur as a 
product of projected global climate change. These communities should be 
recognized as an area of special attention. A regional modeling approach is 
recommended to examine the extent of severity of the problem and to improve 
disease surveillance and the quality of health care services.

PMCID: PMC2305628
PMID: 9615495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Bull World Health Organ. 2000;78(9):1148-55.

Protecting human health in a changing world: the role of social and economic 
development.

Woodward A(1), Hales S, Litidamu N, Phillips D, Martin J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Wellington School of Medicine, University of 
Otago, New Zealand. woodward@wnmeds.ac.nz

The biological and physical environment of the planet is changing at an 
unprecedented rate as a result of human activity, and these changes may have an 
enormous impact on human health. One of the goals of human development is to 
protect health in the face of rapid environmental change, but we often fail to 
do this. The aim in this paper is to distinguish between socioeconomic aspects 
of development that are likely to be protective and those that are likely to 
increase vulnerability (the capacity for loss resulting from environmental 
change). Examples include climate change in the Pacific. We conclude that 
protecting human health in a changing world requires us to take steps to 
minimize harmful change wherever possible, and at the same time to be prepared 
for surprises. The goals of mitigation (reducing or preventing change) and 
adaptation (response to change) are not mutually exclusive. In fact, steps to 
make populations more resilient in the face of change are often similar to those 
that are needed to lighten the load on the environment. We need social policies 
that convert economic growth into human development. Wider application of 
sustainable development concepts is part of the solution. In particular, there 
is a need to promote health as an essential asset of poor and vulnerable 
populations. It is their key to productivity and to surviving shocks; it is also 
the key to achieving broader development goals such as universal education. For 
these reasons it is in the interests of all sectors--economic, social and 
environmental--to play their particular roles in protecting and improving 
health.

PMCID: PMC2560845
PMID: 11019463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Law Psychiatry. 2000 May-Aug;23(3-4):215-28. doi: 
10.1016/s0160-2527(00)00032-7.

Mental health services in New Zealand.

Wilson J(1).

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Health, Wellington, New Zealand. janice_wilson@moh.govt.nz

The development and reorganization of mental health services in New Zealand is 
underpinned by a national strategy, with increased funding from the government, 
and is occurring on a background of radical change in health service policy and 
delivery. The major challenge will be to sustain the developments to date, and 
increase the quality and quantity of services in a climate of ongoing change. A 
more integrated form of service delivery and funding would potentially enhance 
the development of population-based mental health services, which will allow the 
alignment of targeting specialty service to the 3% of the population with the 
highest need, with a more comprehensive approach to overall mental health 
service through the primary sector.

DOI: 10.1016/s0160-2527(00)00032-7
PMID: 10981268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Soc Sci Med. 1998 Nov;47(9):1181-8. doi: 10.1016/s0277-9536(98)00190-7.

Social capital and health: implications for public health and epidemiology.

Lomas J(1).

Author information:
(1)Canadian Health Services Research Foundation, Ottawa, Ont.

Public health and its "basic science", epidemiology, have become colonised by 
the individualistic ethic of medicine and economics. Despite a history in public 
health dating back to John Snow that underlined the importance of social systems 
for health, an imbalance has developed in the attention given to generating 
"social capital" compared to such things as modification of individual's risk 
factors. In an illustrative analysis comparing the potential of six 
progressively less individualised and more community-focused interventions to 
prevent deaths from heart disease, social support and measures to increase 
social cohesion faired well against more individual medical care approaches. In 
the face of such evidence public health professionals and epidemiologists have 
an ethical and strategic decision concerning the relative effort they give to 
increasing social cohesion in communities vs expanding access for individuals to 
traditional public health programs. Practitioners' relative efforts will be 
influenced by the kind of research that is being produced by epidemiologists and 
by the political climate of acceptability for voluntary individual "treatment" 
approaches vs universal policies to build "social capital". For epidemiologists 
to further our emerging understanding of the link between social capital and 
health they must confront issues in measurement, study design and analysis. For 
public health advocates to sensitise the political environment to the potential 
dividend from building social capital, they must confront the values that focus 
on individual-level causal models rather than models of social structure 
(dis)integration. The evolution of explanations for inequalities in health is 
used to illustrate the nature of the change in values.

DOI: 10.1016/s0277-9536(98)00190-7
PMID: 9783861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Psychother Psychosom. 1987;48(1-4):68-77. doi: 10.1159/000288034.

Future directions in consultation-liaison psychiatry.

von Ammon Cavanaugh S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Rush Presbyterian St. Luke's Medical Center, 
Chicago, Ill.

Consultation-liaison psychiatry in the United States has had to reassess its 
priorities with the change in health care economics in the 80 s. Liaison 
programs and educational programs for primary care staff are jeopardized. The 
emphasis has shifted from liaison to reimbursable consultation activities. 
Hospital stays are shorter with emphasis on outpatient and prepaid settings. 
Less expensive health care professionals are often asked to see patients 
previously evaluated by psychiatrists. This paper will discuss the need for 
focused cost-effective liaison services in this climate. Funding strategies for 
consultation-liaison programs, models of staffing consultation-liaison services, 
continuity of care from inpatient to outpatient services, integration of 
consultation-liaison psychiatrists in prepaid health care settings, primary-care 
educational programs, and psychosocial intervention programs for high-risk 
primary-care patients will be discussed.

DOI: 10.1159/000288034
PMID: 3333291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Environ Health Perspect. 1997 Jan;105(1):84-93. doi: 10.1289/ehp.9710584.

An evaluation of climate/mortality relationships in large U.S. cities and the 
possible impacts of a climate change.

Kalkstein LS(1), Greene JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geography, University of Delaware, Newark 19716, USA.

A new air mass-based synoptic procedure is used to evaluate climate/mortality 
relationships as they presently exist and to estimate how a predicted global 
warming might alter these values. Forty-four large U.S. cities with metropolitan 
areas exceeding 1 million in population are analyzed. Sharp increases in 
mortality are noted in summer for most cities in the East and Midwest when two 
particular air masses are present. A very warm air mass of maritime origin is 
most important in the eastern United States, which when present can increase 
daily mortality by as many as 30 deaths in large cities. A hot, dry air mass is 
important in many cities, and, although rare in the East, can increase daily 
mortality by up to 50 deaths. Cities in the South and Southwest show lesser 
weather/mortality relationships in summer. During winter, air mass-induced 
increases in mortality are considerably less than in summer. Although daily 
winter mortality is usually higher than summer, the causes of death that are 
responsible for most winter mortality do not vary much with temperature. Using 
models that estimate climate change for the years 2020 and 2050, it is estimated 
that summer mortality will increase dramatically and winter mortality will 
decrease slightly, even if people acclimatize to the increased warmth. Thus, a 
sizable net increase in weather-related mortality is estimated if the climate 
warms as the models predict.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.9710584
PMCID: PMC1469832
PMID: 9074886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Epidemiol. 1993 Feb;22(1):1-8. doi: 10.1093/ije/22.1.1.

Global environmental change and human population health: a conceptual and 
scientific challenge for epidemiology.

McMichael AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Medicine, University of Adelaide, South Australia.

PIP: A large and rapidly growing human population, resource intensive industrial 
practices, and land exhausting agriculture has overloaded the carrying capacity 
of the planet's natural systems. Evidence of overloading include global warming, 
soil degradation and topsoil loss, decreasing stratospheric ozone, depletion of 
groundwater, reduced genetic and ecosystem diversity, and acidification of water 
and soils. These global environmental changes threaten human health in 
qualitatively different way than the way conventional environmental pollutants 
do. The risks arising from these changes stem from impairment of productivity 
(soils, forests, oceans, biodiversity) or stability (climate, sea level, 
ultraviolet, filtration). Epidemiologist must adopt an ecological model to 
identify, study, and to quantify the health effects of ecological disturbances. 
The health effects from these disturbances include those caused by atmospheric 
changes, by reduced agricultural yield, and by uncontrolled growth of urban 
populations. The UN recognizes that scientific disciplines and human 
capabilities to evaluate and provide sound guidance cannot keep pace with the 
fast rate of ecological change. Thus, rather than empirical evidence, 
interdisciplinary research, using modeling and forecasting to assess health 
effects, is needed to provide decision makers with the best available estimates.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/22.1.1
PMID: 8449629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Nurs Manag. 1997 Jul;5(4):199-205. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2834.1997.00017.x.

Management of change: an essential skill for nursing in the 1990s.

McPhail G(1).

Author information:
(1)Nursing & Midwifery Studies University of Glasgow, UK.

Change is nothing new and indeed has been our only constant, but change today is 
faster and more complex than it has ever been before (Manion 1994). Bushy (1992) 
agrees that the past decade has been a time for rapid global changes, with 
Muller (1992) citing the rapid increase in technology as the root cause. Muller 
(1992) believes that nurses need to develop a new mindset which is more in tune 
with the realities of the 1990s, acknowledging that we are and will be living in 
a constantly changing world, and Zukowski (1995) suggests that regardless of 
whether or not we accept change, we must learn to manage it. Although change 
creates uncertainty and discomfort, Poggenpoel (1992) emphasizes that it often 
leads to real innovation, providing abundant opportunities for creating a better 
way forward. This paper explores the subject of change management, looking first 
at the reasons behind the current climate of change in the healthcare system, 
then outlining change theory in relation to nursing, before discussing the role 
of the nurse as a change agent.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2834.1997.00017.x
PMID: 9248409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Child Abuse Negl. 1987;11(3):443-53. doi: 10.1016/0145-2134(87)90017-2.

Behavioral medicine and health psychology in a changing world.

Conger JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Colorado, School of Medicine, Denver 
80262.

Despite long-established roots in experimental psychophysiology and 
psychosomatic medicine, behavioral medicine and health psychology have only 
recently emerged as recognized, highly visible disciplines within medicine and 
the behavioral sciences. The rapid development of these fields has resulted 
partly from important scientific advances in the biomedical and behavioral 
sciences and partly from changing societal concerns and values. The latter 
include a greater preoccupation with individual self-expression and 
self-fulfillment, a decline in respect for authority per se, and an increased 
skepticism about social institutions. Coupled with these changes has been an 
increasing desire to take responsibility for one's own life and, in matters of 
health, of one's own body. The ways in which scientific advances and social 
changes have influenced the shape of contemporary behavioral medicine and health 
psychology are explored with the aid of two illustrations: the growth of a 
developmental perspective in behavioral medicine and health psychology; and work 
and health, including the effects of job stress and unemployment. Finally, the 
author stresses the need for a greater sense of community and concern for 
others, if we are to succeed in creating a growth-enhancing, health-producing 
climate for society as a whole and for each of us as individuals.

DOI: 10.1016/0145-2134(87)90017-2
PMID: 3315133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Arch Psychiatr Nurs. 1996 Oct;10(5):276-82. doi: 10.1016/s0883-9417(96)80036-7.

Resilience: analysis of the concept.

Dyer JG(1), McGuinness TM.

Author information:
(1)Department, School of Nursing, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Resilience describes a process whereby people bounce back from adversity and go 
on with their lives. It is a dynamic process highly influenced by protective 
factors. Protective factors are specific competencies that are necessary for the 
process of resilience to occur. Competencies are those healthy skills and 
abilities that the individual can access and may occur within the individual or 
the interpersonal or family environment. Psychiatric-mental health nursing has 
always focused on mental-health promotion and attempted to discern positive 
outcomes from adversity and states of wellness amidst difficult circumstances or 
severe illness. Defining specific protective factors that facilitate mental 
health in high-risk groups would enhance our position in today's health care 
climate.

DOI: 10.1016/s0883-9417(96)80036-7
PMID: 8897710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Sci Total Environ. 1996 May 17;184(1-2):57-66. doi: 
10.1016/0048-9697(95)04989-4.

Environmental integrity, racism, health.

Westra L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Philosophy, University of Windsor, Ontario, Canada.

Environmental degradation seriously affects human health. Thus, a close 
relationship exists between the protection of ecosystem integrity and wilderness 
on one hand, and human health on the other. However, there is an overarching, 
holistic perspective in laws and regulations--as well as morality--to to 
maintain a healthy relationship between the two. Problem areas focused on in 
this paper are: (a) climate change and global warming; (b) food production; and 
(c) global equity. This paper argues for the principle of integrity, which 
provides an holistic perspective, suggested as a better approach than that of 
current regulations to mitigate against associated threats to human health.

DOI: 10.1016/0048-9697(95)04989-4
PMID: 8693347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Sch Health. 1975 Jan;45(1):17-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1746-1561.1975.tb04459.x.

Complexities of smoking education.

Neeman RL, Neeman M.

Cigarette smoking is a many-headed Hydra, which grows new smokers' heads as fast 
as they are lopped off. Efforts to change smokers' behavior usually reach a 
point of diminishing returns, as evidenced by experiences in smoking withdrawal 
clinics and in public anti-smoking education campaigns. Obviously, many smokers 
are refactory to anti-smoking education, a situation which has generated a great 
deal of pharmacological, neurochemical, psychological, and sociological 
research. The National Clearinghouse for Smoking and Health in the U.S.A. has 
used a "gradualist" or permissive approach in anti-smoking messages, aimed at 
less hazardous smoking "if you must smoke," rather than at complete cessation, 
and found this approach to be useful. U.S.A. school-children are exposed to 
anti-smoking education in lower grades than formerly, when it was offered in 
high school. Thus a population of as yet non-smoking children is being educated. 
Perhaps the adult non-smokers should be enlisted in an effort to create a social 
climate wherein smoking is not an acceptable behavior-an approach reflecting the 
concept of smoking as a social disease. Health education addressed to the 
receptive non-smoker would circumvent the refractory smoker. A theme with appeal 
to non-smokers is the protest against environmental pollution by smokers. It is 
possible that if a movement by non-smokers against smoking would gather 
momentum, it could turn the present accepting social climate into one rejecting 
smoking, thus striking at the regeneration of the Hydra: the incessant 
recruitment of smokers among ex-smokers and non-smokers. With recruitment below 
replacement level, the Hydra would in time wither away.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1746-1561.1975.tb04459.x
PMID: 1089173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Support Care Cancer. 1994 Sep;2(5):307-11. doi: 10.1007/BF00365584.

Costs and benefits of outpatient therapy.

Rubenstein EB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Specialties, University of Texas, M. D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston 77030.

In recent years, much of the care traditionally rendered in hospitals has been 
shifted to ambulatory settings. This change has been fueled as much by changing 
patterns of reimbursement as by rapid developments in medicine and technology. 
The current climate of health-care reform suggests that this trend will continue 
for the near future. Unfortunately, there are few studies that systematically 
evaluate the cost effectiveness or benefits of ambulatory care. Among the few 
such studies published to date, the results are not overwhelmingly positive. 
While the monetary costs of ambulatory care are generally far lower than 
inpatient management, several studies suggest that family and household 
disruption are prominent features of outpatient strategies. Thus, the 
measurement of the direct and indirect costs and benefits of ambulatory 
treatment presents a significant challenge to researchers. Development of 
methodologies to support such studies must be among our highest priorities.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00365584
PMID: 8000729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 1992 May;33(4):649-57. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-7610.1992.tb00902.x.

Child health promotion, screening and surveillance.

Hall DM(1).

Author information:
(1)St George's Hospital & Medical School, London, U.K.

After the Second World War, as the incidence of infectious and nutritional 
disorders declined, professionals and parents began to seek more precise 
diagnosis and more effective therapy for children with cerebral palsy, mental 
handicap and related disorders. Although a handful of exceptional men and women 
had shown what could be accomplished (Shonkoff & Meisels, 1990), the prevailing 
view was that little could be done and indeed parents of these children were not 
infrequently advised to "put them in an institution". In the 1950s and 60s, new 
ideas began to create a more optimistic climate of opinion. It was thought that 
much, perhaps most, disability was caused by perinatal complications and was 
therefore potentially preventable; and that early intervention (e.g. 
physiotherapy for cerebral palsy) might lead to cure or at least substantial 
improvement. Research in child psychology offered a more scientific basis for 
the assessment and management of developmental disorders. A sense of urgency was 
created by the prevalent belief that the child's developing nervous system and 
psychological functioning were far more amenable to intervention in the first 
few months or years of life than subsequently (Anastasiow, 1990), and that if 
suitable therapy was not provided then, the opportunity would be lost for ever. 
This notion of a "critical period" in development, together with optimism 
regarding the possibility of intervention, led to a sense of urgency which was 
responsible for a gradual change in the provision of child health services. 
Previously, the paediatric health professional had simply waited for the parent 
to seek advice--the "passive" or "reactive" approach.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.1992.tb00902.x
PMID: 1601940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Environ Health Perspect. 1998 Mar;106(3):147-53. doi: 10.1289/ehp.98106147.

Dengue fever epidemic potential as projected by general circulation models of 
global climate change.

Patz JA(1), Martens WJ, Focks DA, Jetten TH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene 
and Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205-2179, USA.

Climate factors influence the transmission of dengue fever, the world's most 
widespread vector-borne virus. We examined the potential added risk posed by 
global climate change on dengue transmission using computer-based simulation 
analysis to link temperature output from three climate general circulation 
models (GCMs) to a dengue vectorial capacity equation. Our outcome measure, 
epidemic potential, is the reciprocal of the critical mosquito density threshold 
of the vectorial capacity equation. An increase in epidemic potential indicates 
that a smaller number of mosquitoes can maintain a state of endemicity of 
disease where dengue virus is introduced. Baseline climate data for comparison 
are from 1931 to 1980. Among the three GCMs, the average projected temperature 
elevation was 1.16 degrees C, expected by the year 2050. All three GCMs 
projected a temperature-related increase in potential seasonal transmission in 
five selected cities, as well as an increase in global epidemic potential, with 
the largest area change occurring in temperate regions. For regions already at 
risk, the aggregate epidemic potential across the three scenarios rose on 
average between 31 and 47% (range, 24-74%). If climate change occurs, as many 
climatologists believe, this will increase the epidemic potential of 
dengue-carrying mosquitoes, given viral introduction and susceptible human 
populations. Our risk assessment suggests that increased incidence may first 
occur in regions bordering endemic zones in latitude or altitude. Endemic 
locations may be at higher risk from hemorrhagic dengue if transmission 
intensity increases.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.98106147
PMCID: PMC1533051
PMID: 9452414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Acad Med. 2000 Jun;75(6):623-33. doi: 10.1097/00001888-200006000-00014.

"No fear" curricular change: monitoring curricular change in the W. K. Kellogg 
Foundation's National Initiative on Community Partnerships and Health 
Professions Education.

Bland CJ(1), Starnaman S, Harris D, Henry R, Hembroff L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Practice and Community Health, University of Minnesota 
Medical Schools, Minneapolis 55455-0392, USA. bland001@tc.umn.edu

PURPOSE: To assess the effect of the W. K. Kellogg Foundation's five-year (9/91 
to 9/96) primary care curricular change initiative involving seven sites and 27 
schools with respect to courses offered, graduates' specialty choices, and 
valued school features (e.g., reputation, research, productivity, school 
climate) and to track how well the schools possessed or developed the processes 
associated with enduring curricular change.
METHOD: Information was collected via pre- and post-surveys of faculty and 
students, site visits, annual reports, and medical students' specialty match 
results.
RESULTS: In general, the schools either possessed or developed the 
institutional, curricular design, and curriculum features associated with 
successful curricular change. Further, the initiative had a positive or neutral 
impact on most of the valued features: 199 courses were revised or developed, 
including 138 offered in the community, involving 141 interdisciplinary faculty. 
Comparing 1991-1997 data, the average percentage increases in students' 
selecting primary care from the involved schools were greater than the national 
percentages. In 1997, a larger percentage of project school graduates selected 
primary care than the national average.
CONCLUSION: Medical schools can make major curricular changes and achieve 
intended outcomes (e.g., new and/ or revised courses, multidisciplinary 
instruction, instruction in the community, and changes in specialty choice), and 
this can occur without negatively impacting other valued school aspects.

DOI: 10.1097/00001888-200006000-00014
PMID: 10875507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Can J Public Health. 1999 Nov-Dec;90 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S68-70. doi: 
10.1007/BF03403586.

Future directions in population health.

Hancock T(1).

Author information:
(1)thancock@yorku.ca

The long-term health of the population will be influenced by a number of major 
forces in the next century. In this brief review, particular emphasis is placed 
on environmental and economic forces. Major global environmental changes include 
climate change and global warming, resource depletion, ecotoxicity and reduced 
biodiversity. We do not yet know the impact on longevity of lifetime exposure to 
a mix of persistent toxic chemicals in our environment, since it has only been 
widespread in the past 40-50 years. The health impacts of global warming are 
only just beginning to be understood and could be profound. But perhaps the most 
profound threat to population health is economic growth, to the extent that it 
undermines environmental and social sustainability. We need a new form of 
capitalism, one that simultaneously increases environmental, social, economic 
and human capital, if population health is to be maintained in the 21st century.

La sant√© de la population √† long terme sera influenc√©e par un certain nombre de 
forces majeures au cours du prochain si√®cle. Dans cette br√®ve revue, une 
attention particuli√®re est port√©e aux forces environnementales et √©conomiques. 
Les changements majeurs environnementaux globaux incluent le changement 
climatique et le r√©chauffement de la plan√®te, l‚Äô√©puisement des ressources, la 
toxicit√© √©cologique et la r√©duction de la biodiversit√©. Nous ne connaissons pas 
encore les cons√©quences de l‚Äôexposition √† vie √† des produits chimiques toxiques 
persistants dans notre environnement sur la long√©vit√© puisque leur utilisation 
√©tendue ne s‚Äôest faite qu‚Äôau cours des quarante ou cinquante derni√®res ann√©es. 
Les cons√©quences sur la sant√© du r√©chauffement de la plan√®te commencent √† peine 
√† √™tre comprises et pourraient √™tre profondes. Mais la plus grande menace sur la 
sant√© de la po-pulation est peut-√™tre la croissance √©conomique, puisqu‚Äôelle mine 
le d√©veloppement durable, environnemental et social. Nous avons besoin d‚Äôune 
nouvelle forme de capitalisme, une forme qui augmente simultan√©ment le capital 
environnemental, social, √©conomique et humain, si nous voulons que la sant√© de 
la population soit maintenue au 21e si√®cle.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03403586
PMCID: PMC6980046
PMID: 10686767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Parasitology. 1993;106 Suppl:S5-9. doi: 10.1017/s0031182000086078.

Global warming: trends and effects.

Tickell C(1).

Author information:
(1)Green College Centre, Radcliffe Observatory, Oxford.

As animals we have been a remarkably successful species; but also as animals we 
are vulnerable to environmental, in particular climate change. Such change is 
accelerating as a result of human activity, and global warming may already be 
taking place. Although we can foresee the trends, we cannot yet be specific 
about the results. Change usually proceeds by steps rather than gradients. But 
warming would probably include new risks to human health and contribute to an 
increase in human displacement. Of course climate change is only one among other 
complex problems facing human society, but it is closely related to them all, 
including population increase, environmental degradation and loss of 
biodiversity. We cannot prevent global warming but we can anticipate and 
mitigate some of its worst effects. Peoples and governments still need 
persuading of the need for action and of the magnitude of the issue at stake.

DOI: 10.1017/s0031182000086078
PMID: 8488072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Environ Health Perspect. 1991 Dec;96:175-6. doi: 10.1289/ehp.9196175.

Potential health effects of climatic change: effects of increased ultraviolet 
radiation on man.

Urbach F(1).

Author information:
(1)Temple Medical Practices, Port Washington, PA 19034.

There is scientific evidence that stratospheric ozone concentration has declined 
over the Northern Hemisphere in the past 20 years, and projections based on 
various assumptions about future release of chlorofluorocarbon gases and other 
contaminants suggest that this decline will continue into the next century. The 
effects on human health secondary to increase in biologically effective 
ultraviolet radiation are expected to consist of increases in nonmelanoma skin 
cancer and malignant melanoma of the skin, possible alteration of immune 
response, and development of lens cataracts. The recent and projected increases 
in skin cancer and changes in human immune responses are discussed.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.9196175
PMCID: PMC1568238
PMID: 1820263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Hastings Cent Rep. 1989 Jul-Aug;19(4):32-7.

A compromise on abortion?

Rhoden NK(1).

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

KIE: Rhoden's article is one of three on "Abortion: searching for common ground" 
in this issue of the Hastings Center Report. Her article, together with those by 
M. Mahowald and M. Glendon, was prompted by the expectation that the impending 
U.S. Supreme Court decision in Webster v. Reproductive Health Services (3 July 
1989) would overturn or restrict Roe v. Wade (1973). Rhoden, an advocate for the 
pro-choice position, asks whether a compromise leading to an acceptable 
regulatory policy is possible or desirable among those on opposite sides of the 
abortion issue. She identifies several reasons why the Roe decision is 
vulnerable to review, but argues that effective education about sexuality and 
comprehensive social support of women are better approaches to abortion than 
restrictive legislation.

PIP: Since Roe v. Wade is standing in a climate of potential restrictions or a 
possible overturning, the question of compromise must be thought of by even the 
most ardent pro-choice proponents. This article reviews the judgements in Roe v. 
Wade that are weakly supported and therefore vulnerable to change. Suggestions 
as to what compromises might be made and who will be harmed by them were then 
discussed. The weakest Roe v. Wade judgement regards the timing of the trimester 
system for delineating legal requirements for abortion. Since a compromise in 
timing would make it difficult to obtain late abortions, women bearing severely 
deformed fetuses who usually have late abortions due to the tardiness of test 
results may be the most harmed by a compromise. A concession that would please 
both sides of the debate would be to lower the number of unwanted pregnancies by 
behaviorally motivating people to use birth control devices.

PMID: 2663778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Med Trop (Mars). 1997;57(4 Bis):431-5.

[Tropical climate pathology].

[Article in French]

Besancenot JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Groupement de Recherche Climat et Sant√©, Facult√© de M√©decine de Dijon, 
France.

In addition to being a determinant factor for the development of infectious and 
parasitic diseases, tropical weather conditions can have harmful effects for the 
human organism different from those of temperate climates. Adverse effects can 
result from aggressive environmental factors such as ultraviolet radiation, 
extreme heat, abrupt changes in temperature, and tropical storms. In 
weather-sensitive subjects, exposure to tropical conditions increases the risk 
of acute reactions including ischemic heart disease, asthma attacks, and kidney 
stones. Adverse effects can be enhanced by suddenness of change in climate as 
underlined by the stress experienced by air travelers. In practice it is 
important to recognize that different tropical climates have different effects 
on health. Intertropical climates range from dry and rainy areas to plains and 
mountain areas. Knowledge of the concepts of climatopathology is necessary to 
advise patients on the choice of destination and the most favorable period for 
travel.

PMID: 9612744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Science. 2000 Jul 14;289(5477):284-8. doi: 10.1126/science.289.5477.284.

Global water resources: vulnerability from climate change and population growth.

V√∂r√∂smarty CJ(1), Green P, Salisbury J, Lammers RB.

Author information:
(1)Water Systems Analysis Group, Complex Systems Research Center, Ocean 
Processes Analytical Laboratory, Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and 
Space, Earth Sciences Department, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH 03824, 
USA.

The future adequacy of freshwater resources is difficult to assess, owing to a 
complex and rapidly changing geography of water supply and use. Numerical 
experiments combining climate model outputs, water budgets, and socioeconomic 
information along digitized river networks demonstrate that (i) a large 
proportion of the world's population is currently experiencing water stress and 
(ii) rising water demands greatly outweigh greenhouse warming in defining the 
state of global water systems to 2025. Consideration of direct human impacts on 
global water supply remains a poorly articulated but potentially important facet 
of the larger global change question.

DOI: 10.1126/science.289.5477.284
PMID: 10894773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Addiction. 2000 Nov;95 Suppl 3:S395-417. doi: 10.1080/09652140020004304.

Methods for identifying and assessing groups in health behavioral research.

Rapkin BD(1), Dumont KA.

Author information:
(1)Community Outreach Program, Department of Psychiatry, Behavioral Sciences, 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, 
USA.

Methods to study groups developed in other fields have much to contribute to the 
study of health behavior, including alcohol and substance use. This paper 
surveys group methods in order to demonstrate how attention to group levels of 
analysis can provide new insights about the context and causes of health 
behavior. The first major section of this paper focuses on the influences on 
health behavior associated with "naturally occurring groups" such as peer 
networks, families, workplaces, neighborhoods, churches, treatment groups and 
residential settings. Different aspects of group influence are discussed in 
terms of seven different features of social groups: history, structure, 
function, resources, process, norms and climate. The second major part of this 
paper is concerned with methods to identify meaningful subgroups in 
heterogeneous samples. Following an overview of taxonomic methods to identify 
and assign cases to groups, we highlight the potential for these methods to help 
address a number of fundamental theoretical problems in health behavioral 
research, including: describing cultural diversity, distinguishing response sets 
in survey research, controlling error in outcomes scores related to baseline 
differences, tracking trajectories of change, and revealing interactions among 
determinants of health behavior. The third and final section of the paper 
highlights specific applications of taxonomic and group-influence methodologies 
in intervention research, including design and analysis of randomized trials, 
studies of existing treatment settings and group-level variables involved in 
translational research.

DOI: 10.1080/09652140020004304
PMID: 11132365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Rehabilitation (Stuttg). 2000 Aug;39(4):215-22. doi: 10.1055/s-2000-5897.

[High-mountain climate therapy for skin diseases and allergies-- mode of action, 
therapeutic results, and immunologic effects].

[Article in German]

Engst R(1), Vocks E.

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik f√ºr Dermatologie und Allergologie, M√ºnchen.

Dermatological-allergologic climatotherapy is interpreted as a therapy within a 
specific climate with proven therapeutic benefits, immediate and longterm. 
Intensive classical dermatological in-patient therapy is combined with specific 
climatic effects. Primarily, the climate of the high mountains (1560 m) and of 
the North Sea islands is of proven efficacy for dermatoses and allergic diseases 
such as atopic dermatitis (neurodermatitis), eczema, psoriasis, T-cell lymphoma, 
bronchial asthma. Specialized therapeutic utilities exist. Directly influencing 
climatic factors such as insolation, thermic-hygric and aerosol conditions 
without or with diminished allergic potency and nonspecific stimulating climate 
factors change immune functions and effect stabilization. The therapeutic 
immediate and longterm efficacy of the high mountain climate is proven by 
excellent follow-up results. Its superiority to the dermatological therapy 
applied at home is evident. Measurement and analysis of climate efficacy has 
however proven difficult because of its complexity. The findings of several 
recent clinical and biochemical studies are presented.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2000-5897
PMID: 11008279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Int J Parasitol. 1998 Jun;28(6):947-53. doi: 10.1016/s0020-7519(98)00045-9.

Malaria in a changing world: an Australian perspective.

Walker J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Westmead Hospital, NSW, Australia. 
johnw@cidm.wh.usyd.edu.au

Three elements must be present for endemic malaria: infected humans, susceptible 
mosquitoes and a suitable climate. All three occur in parts of Australia and yet 
this country has always been a region of marginal malaria endemicity. With the 
exception of a large epidemic in Cairns during the Second World War, most 
outbreaks have occurred in small, isolated populations of the Northern 
Territory. The last epidemic was at the Roper River Mission in the Northern 
Territory in 1962. Since Australia was declared to be free of endemic malaria in 
1983, only sporadic cases of local transmission have occurred. There have been 
suggestions that future climate change may increase the range of the major 
vector in Australia, Anopheles farauti, and consequently lead to the 
re-establishment of endemic malaria. This possibility is discussed in relation 
to experiences in this and other regions. It is stressed that climate change in 
only one component in a complex epidemiological setting, and that other aspects 
such as human activity are probably more important.

DOI: 10.1016/s0020-7519(98)00045-9
PMID: 9673873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Ter Arkh. 1985;57(10):61-5.

[Lipid peroxidation as an indicator of the adaptive capacity of patients with 
chronic bronchitis during sanatorium and health resort treatment with a change 
in climate and geography].

[Article in Russian]

Trubnikov GV, Rybal'chenko OS.

Lipid peroxidation (LPO) in the blood plasma and erythrocytes was studied in 99 
inhabitants of the southern part of West Siberia suffering from chronic 
bronchitis, of them 64 with obstructive bronchitis. They were sent for treatment 
to the contrast climatic zone (Yalta, the Crimea), and LPO was examined before 
the trip and after return in the course of a month (three times). LPO activity 
at a later stage as compared to the initial one was raised in the patients with 
signs of disadaptation (54 patients). The time course of LPO up to the initial 
level was over up to the 12th day after return in the patients with moderate 
symptoms of disadaptation in the warm season and up to the 30th day in the cold 
period. LPO activity in the patients with pronounced symptoms of disadaptation 
was more noticeable, the time course of the indicators up to the initial level 
was more delayed, particularly in erythrocytes and in the cold season. Thus LPO 
activity in chronic bronchitis in terms of its expression and period depends on 
patients' adaptogenicity to contrast change of climatic geographic zones after 
therapy in a sanatorium.

PMID: 2934845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. East Afr Med J. 1996 Aug;73(8):560-2.

Global warming and health: a review.

Amofah GK(1).

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Health, Kumasi, Ghana.

The paper looks at the phenomenon of global warming and its potential health 
effects and outlines a number of plausible response by the health sector in 
developing countries to its threat. It suggests that the health sector should 
facilitate an international effort at addressing this challenge, mainly through 
advocacy, epidemiological surveillance and awareness creation.

PIP: There is reasonable evidence that the world's concentration of greenhouse 
gases is increasing and global warming is occurring. However, the relation 
between the increasing concentration of greenhouse gases and global warming, the 
magnitude of the change, and the likely health effects in the future remain 
unclear. Measures must nonetheless be taken to check any potential future 
adverse effects of global warming. Global warming and its potential health 
effects are discussed along with some plausible responses by the health sector 
in developing countries to its threat. A collective international effort is 
needed to avert a global catastrophe. The health sector should facilitate such a 
collaboration mainly through advocacy, epidemiological surveillance, and 
awareness creation of the potential health effects of global warming.

PMID: 8898476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Fed Regist. 1999 Apr 16;64(73):18922-3.

Grant award to the Division of Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities, 
Department of Health and Social Services, State of Alaska. Center for Substance 
Abuse Treatment (CSAT), Center for Mental Health Services (CMHS), Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), HHS. Availability of 
grant funds for the Division of Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities, 
Department of Health and Social Services, State of Alaska.

[No authors listed]

This notice is to inform the public that CSAT and CMHS are making available 
approximately $5,000,000 for an award in FY 1999 to the Division of Mental 
Health and Developmental Disabilities, Department of Health and Social Services, 
State of Alaska to support development, implementation, and evaluation of a 
comprehensive, seamless system of care for persons with co-occurring substance 
abuse (including alcohol and other drugs) and mental health disorders in 
Anchorage, Alaska, and its environs. CSAT and CMHS will make this award if the 
application is recommended for approval by the Initial Review Group and the CSAT 
and CMHS National Advisory Councils. This is not a formal request for 
applications; assistance will be provided only to the Alaska Division of Mental 
Health and Developmental Disabilities. Eligibility for this program is limited 
to the State of Alaska, as specified in Congressional report language, in 
recognition of primacy of its responsibility for, and interest in, providing for 
the needs of its citizens, and because the success of the program will depend 
upon the authority and ability to broadly coordinate the variety of resources 
essential for full program success. The State has committed itself to moving 
certain mental health services from their extant institutional bases to 
community bases, and, simultaneously, changing from parallel systems of service 
delivery--for substance abuse and mental health problems--to an approach 
designed to deliver services seamlessly to persons with comorbidity. Alaska 
needs a high level of systemic competence in delivering these services due, in 
great part, to its climate (resulting in deaths of homeless comorbid persons), 
and to the requirements of its proposed systems changes. The proposed project 
presents a unique opportunity for SAMHSA and its Centers to learn, first hand, 
how the transition from parallel systems to a seamless system of care can be 
accomplished in a small city in a rural/frontier State, and at what costs. The 
project promises to yield learnings on the factors and circumstances that 
facilitate and/or retard systemic change in complex treatment systems. This 
"Anchorage Comorbidity Services" project is also part of SAMHSA's commitment to 
improving services, and relates directly to the resolution unanimously adopted 
by its National Advisory Council earlier this year. Funding from CSAT and CMHS 
will support some services to persons with co-occurring disorders; continuing 
planning, review, management, and infrastructure development for the effort; and 
a tripartite evaluation of the project, including process, outcome, and impact 
evaluations. This is a unique opportunity to evaluate significant change in a 
State system of care for persons with co-occurring disorders.

PMID: 10558551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Addiction. 1993 Jan;88 Suppl:9S-17S. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.1993.tb02157.x.

The negotiation of New Zealand alcohol policy in a decade of stabilized 
consumption and political change: the role of research.

Casswell S(1), Stewart L, Duignan P.

Author information:
(1)Alcohol & Public Health Research Unit, University of Auckland, New Zealand.

Significant changes in the key alcohol policy areas of availability, advertising 
and taxation have taken place in New Zealand from 1985 to 1991. These changes 
are described in the context of the social climate which was one of extreme 
fiscal crisis and an unprecedented swing to the right. The very limited role 
played by public health research in the process of policy development is viewed 
in part as a consequence of this social climate. The political changes affected 
the strength and extent of the public health voices in the debate and the 
reception they received. In each of the policy areas in which change occurred, 
the policy-keeper was other than a public health agency and the utilization of 
research by public health advocates was, therefore, in response to already 
articulated positions. The dissemination of research relied too heavily on 
lengthy written submissions, and too little on media advocacy and interpersonal 
contact. There was also a lack of directly relevant local research to inform the 
policy debate. The case study illustrates the constraints on researchers' in the 
policy development process, but suggests that such involvement is important for 
the public's health.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.1993.tb02157.x
PMID: 8453350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Leadersh Health Serv. 1993 Nov-Dec;2(6):20-4.

Health care lessons from Thailand.

Schwartz S(1).

Author information:
(1)NORR Partnership Limited, Architects and Engineers, Toronto.

Thailand's health care system incorporates the private and public sectors. The 
government regulates health care through a system of capping, which protects its 
interests while providing a climate for competition. As a result, the private 
sector has developed and implemented some interesting concepts in health care as 
it turned to prevention, hospital care alternatives, neighbourhood-based 
ambulatory care and home care. The author suggests that Canada could benefit by 
examining some of Thailand's innovations.

PIP: The health care system of Thailand functions in an active economy and a 
political system in which there is a change in government about every 2 years. 
The governments consider infrastructure projects (e.g., health care) to be too 
great for the budget so they leave much of health services to the private 
sector. The private sector operates 50% of hospitals which receive US$ 
26/year/patient from the government. The government assumes about 100,000 
patients for each private hospital. The government and third party providers are 
developing a range of insurance plans. Private providers offer insurance plans 
based on public insurance plans. The private providers voluntarily work within 
government-regulated insurance caps. Private providers are considering 
delivering of services to nonpaying patients to increase revenue. Thailand 
scores higher than its neighbors in life expectancy and infant mortality (world 
ranking: male life expectancy 104 vs. 145-210, female life expectancy 123 vs. 
148-209; infant mortality 120 vs. 138-210). Even though Thailand is trying to 
improve accessibility and its standards of practice, good private facilities are 
accessible to everyone and the standards of many public facilities are lower 
than those of private hospitals. The private sector treats more publicly funded 
patients than they did in the past which is improving accessibility. Some 
private hospitals have streamlined their operations by setting up neighborhood 
clinics for non-hospital-based day services, mobile clinics, an extramural 
hospital, and home care services. In Canada, the private sector is limited to 
deinsured services (e.g., in vitro fertilization) and continuing care (e.g., 
home care and nursing homes). Greater participation of the private sector is 
likely to occur in Canada. Canada lacks a clear government policy on private 
involvement in the delivery of health services. Thailand sets caps to protect 
the government's interest while allowing competition based on service.

PMID: 10130773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Bull World Health Organ. 2000;78(9):1117-26.

The urban environment and health in a world of increasing globalization: issues 
for developing countries.

McMichael AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine, England. tony.mcmichael@lshtm.ac.uk

Urban living is the keystone of modern human ecology. Cities have multiplied and 
expanded rapidly worldwide over the past two centuries. Cities are sources of 
creativity and technology, and they are the engines for economic growth. 
However, they are also sources of poverty, inequality, and health hazards from 
the environment. Urban populations have long been incubators and gateways for 
infectious diseases. The early industrializing period of unplanned growth and 
laissez-faire economic activity in cities in industrialized countries has been 
superseded by the rise of collective management of the urban environment. This 
occurred in response to environmental blight, increasing literacy, the 
development of democratic government, and the collective accrual of wealth. In 
many low-income countries, this process is being slowed by the pressures and 
priorities of economic globalization. Beyond the traditional risks of diarrhoeal 
disease and respiratory infections in the urban poor and the adaptation of 
various vector-borne infections to urbanization, the urban environment poses 
various physicochemical hazards. These include exposure to lead, air pollution, 
traffic hazards, and the "urban heat island" amplification of heatwaves. As the 
number of urban consumers and their material expectations rise and as the use of 
fossil fuels increases, cities contribute to the large-scale pressures on the 
biosphere including climate change. We must develop policies that ameliorate the 
existing, and usually unequally distributed, urban environmental health hazards 
and larger-scale environmental problems.

PMCID: PMC2560839
PMID: 11019460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Eval Health Prof. 1996 Mar;19(1):30-47. doi: 10.1177/016327879601900103.

A climate survey for medical students. A means to assess change.

Bergen MR(1), Guarino CM, Jacobs CD.

Author information:
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, USA.

An instrument was developed to assess the perceptions of students regarding six 
aspects of school climate and their experience of and attitudes toward sexual 
harassment and gender insensitivity. During clerkship orientation, 77 students 
(92% return rate), half female, were given the survey. Cronbach alpha 
reliabilities for the six scales ranged from .71 to .85. One significant 
female/male difference among the three scales of general school climate was 
observed; two significant female/male differences occurred among the three 
scales relating to gender concerns. Seventy percent of both males and females 
reported having observed sexually harassing behavior during the previous year; 
46% of females and 15% of males reported experiencing sexually harassing 
behavior during the year. Observing and/or personally experiencing sexual 
harassment was associated with a decrease in positive climate ratings and an 
increase in negative climate ratings.

DOI: 10.1177/016327879601900103
PMID: 10186902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Adv Nurs. 1997 Oct;26(4):692-7. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.00391.x.

Nursing ideology and the 'generic career'.

Gavin JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Studies, Buckinghamshire College, Chalfont, St Giles, 
England.

A review of the concept of ideology in a nursing context is presented. The 
meaning of a nursing ideology is explored and that meaning compared to the 
proposals for the future of nursing contained in the 1996 report on The Future 
Healthcare Workforce published by the University of Manchester, England. The 
paper suggests a number of core beliefs and values that are generally supported 
in nursing and their implications for the future development of the profession. 
These include a commitment to the role of science in nursing, the concept of 
caring in nursing practice and the continued pursuit of the professional 
project. The paper will demonstrate the extent to which the proposals contained 
within the report for a 'generic career' compliment or conflict with the 
suggested ideology of nursing. It concludes with a reference to the 
policy-making process at local and national levels and the opportunities 
available to nurses to influence the direction of change. The paper reflects the 
volatility of the current political climate in health care and the extent to 
which nurses operating in that climate feel empowered or disenfranchised.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.00391.x
PMID: 9354979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Environ Health Perspect. 1995 Apr;103(4):352-7. doi: 10.1289/ehp.95103352.

The need for water quality criteria for frogs.

Boyer R(1), Grue CE.

Author information:
(1)Washington Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, School of Fisheries, 
University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

Amphibians are considered reliable indicators of environmental quality. In the 
western United States, a general decline of frog populations parallels an 
apparent worldwide decline. The factors thought to be contributing to declines 
in frog populations include habitat loss, introduction of exotic species, 
overexploitation, disease, climate change, and decreasing water quality. With 
respect to water quality, agroecosystems use 80-90% of the water resources in 
the western United States, frequently resulting in highly eutrophic conditions. 
Recent investigations suggest that these eutrophic conditions (elevated pH, 
water temperature, and un-ionized ammonia) may be associated with frog embryo 
mortality or malformations. However, water quality criteria for frogs and other 
amphibians do not currently exist. Here, we briefly review data that support the 
need to develop water quality parameters for frogs in agroecosystems and other 
habitats.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.95103352
PMCID: PMC1519110
PMID: 7607135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Sch Health. 1992 Sep;62(7):298-303. doi: 10.1111/j.1746-1561.1992.tb01247.x.

Adolescent pregnancy options.

Resnick MD(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455.

The range of pregnancy options available to adolescents each have significant 
ramifications for future educational and economic achievement. The changing 
societal context of adolescent pregnancy decision-making are described, and the 
characteristics of adolescents who choose to terminate their pregnancy, parent 
their child, or place for adoption are examined. The role of significant others 
in decision-making and the implications of mandatory parental involvement in 
pregnancy decision-making is discussed, as well as the roles of schools in 
promoting the well-being and potential of adolescents considering pregnancy 
decisions.

PIP: Future employment options and education are affected by teen pregnancy and 
pregnancy decisions. School-based professionals must be aware and understand the 
issues surrounding adolescent pregnancy in order to promote well-being and 
utilize school resources effectively. Rockefeller's National Commission on 
Children report recommends development of an expansion of active partnerships of 
the school with the community and family to provide prevention services and 
opportunities for recreational and cultural enrichment. Schools need to be the 
dynamic force which enhances the life courses of both pregnant teenagers and the 
larger youth population. Discussion focuses on the social context of pregnancy 
options, pregnancy options (influences of significant others and differences 
between pregnant adolescents), mandated parental involvement, and implications 
for service provision. Attitudes to adolescent pregnancy and pregnancy options 
have changed. Youth are exposed to more sexually explicit material in the media, 
i.e., 2400 sexual references/year in television and an 103% increase in sexual 
content since 1980. Social reality and viewers' preferences as a justification 
do not recognize the power of reinforcement of norms and a climate for 
nonmarital sexual behavior. Adoption is used as an example of how norms have 
changes from 95% of pregnant adolescents choosing adoption in the 1950s, 14% by 
1971, and 5% the mid-1980s. The source of the decline is attributed to the 
decrease in stigma associated with adolescent pregnancy and the greater 
acceptability of single parenting. The societal pressures are reflected in the 
counseling options offered, i.e., adoption may not be provided as an 
alternative. An adolescent's pregnancy decision is most influenced by the 
adolescent's mother, the male partner, and peers. Prior to a pregnancy, the 
adolescent's best friend is more influential than a mother's attitudes. 38 
states mandate parental involvement, but a teenager's perception of the quality 
of communication within the home is a better predictor of parental involvement.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1746-1561.1992.tb01247.x
PMID: 1434557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Early Hum Dev. 1992 Jun-Jul;29(1-3):43-50. doi: 10.1016/0378-3782(92)90056-m.

A 50-year overview of perinatal medicine.

Avery ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Infant mortality in 1990 was approximately one-tenth that of 1950 in most of the 
industrialized countries of the world. The forces of change included the 
social-political climate, advent of neonatal intensive care, better insight into 
nutritional requirements of preterm infants and application of basic science to 
the study of events around the time of birth, and illnesses of the neonate. 
Attention has been paid to the advantages of human milk for the newborn infant, 
the importance of maternal bonding and involvement of both parents in care of 
the infant. Prenatal diagnosis, with option of abortion, has reduced the 
prevalence of some serious disorders of the fetus.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-3782(92)90056-m
PMID: 1396277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Hygie. 1983 Oct;2(3):49-53.

[Objectives of education for health].

[Article in French]

Berthet E.

The health concept has recently acquired a new dimension which reflects in 
health education. To its fundamental objective which is the control of disease 
must not be added an improved quality of life. Health education must create a 
turn of mind in order to suppress a number of avoidable risks. It is at the root 
of prevention which should be based on precise epidemiological data. Health 
education also plays a role in the socio-economic development of nations. All 
aspects of development: education, agriculture, public works, health and economy 
are interrelated. The health of a community depends on a number of decision 
taken in various sectors. The author who acted as health advisor to several 
developing countries proposed, with little success, the creation of 
interministerial committees to coordinate different sectors which all can make 
contribution to better health. Health education is one of the factors of 
development because it contributes to: increase the efficacy of health services, 
curative as well as preventive; to improve productivity by reducing occupational 
diseases and accidents; to change the social climate of communities by getting 
the people to participate in finding solutions to their own health problems. 
Moreover, health education needs to be effective on a nationwide scale to be 
supported by health authorities. This is also one of the points made in the 
editorial (p. 4) to explain certain failures due to the absence of policy 
support.

PMID: 6654348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 1996 Sep;54(3):263-70. doi: 10.1016/0020-7292(96)02717-8.

Female health workers: an obstetric risk group.

Ortayl√¨ N(1), Ozuƒüurlu M, G√∂k√ßay G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Health, University of Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to gather information about the pregnancies 
of female health workers and to compare them with those of another group of 
working women with different working conditions, namely bank workers,
METHODS: Using a cross-sectional comparative design, physicians (184), nurses 
(197) and bank-workers (192) were interviewed about their previous pregnancies 
and working conditions during those pregnancies.
RESULTS: The majority of physicians (70.6%) and nurses (81.2%) had night work 
during their pregnancies and two-thirds of them continued this work until the 
last month of pregnancy, even though they have a legal right not to work during 
the night after the 7th month of pregnancy. Health workers had shorter maternity 
leaves than bank workers (P < 0.001) and complained more about the negative 
attitudes of managers and colleagues during their pregnancy (P < 0.001). Health 
workers had more preterm deliveries (P < 0.05) compared with bank workers, and 
nurses had more low birth weight babies compared with bank workers (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: There is a need for a change in the climate in hospitals in terms of 
the working conditions of pregnant health staff and the attitudes towards them.

DOI: 10.1016/0020-7292(96)02717-8
PMID: 8889635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Health Policy Plan. 2000 Jun;15(2):207-16. doi: 10.1093/heapol/15.2.207.

Universal health care? The views of Negev Bedouin Arabs on health services.

Borkan JM(1), Morad M, Shvarts S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. Borkan@shani.net

BACKGROUND: This study examines health and health care attitudes, practices and 
utilization patterns among the Bedouin Arab minority in the south of Israel. 
Particular attention is given to the effects of the new National Insurance Law 
that provides universal coverage for the first time, and to the identification 
of critical issues for further research.
METHODS: Focus groups, adapted to Bedouin culture, were the primary method of 
data collection. Twelve groups (158 participants) from throughout the Negev met 
for 3-7 sessions each, using specially trained local moderators and observers. 
Issues discussed and analyzed included experience and satisfaction with the 
current health system (both modern and traditional), health service 
availability/barriers, health care needs, influences of social change, and the 
National Insurance Law.
RESULTS: Participants voice dissatisfaction with modern health services in the 
Bedouin sector and the state of health of Negev Bedouin. They place great 
emphasis on the connection between health and the rapid social and economic 
changes, which this traditionally nomadic group is undergoing. Traditional 
health care is felt to still exist, but its importance is waning. The National 
Insurance law is having a major impact on the Bedouin, particularly because it 
provides universal health insurance coverage where only partial coverage had 
been in effect.
CONCLUSIONS: This study, one of the first of its kind in the Bedouin sector, 
showed that the focus group method, if properly modified to cultural norms, can 
be a valuable research tool in traditional communities and in health service 
research. The findings from this research can be used to direct efforts to 
improve health policy and health services for this group, as well as preparing 
the way for further qualitative or quantitative studies.

DOI: 10.1093/heapol/15.2.207
PMID: 10837044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Health Educ Q. 1988 Fall;15(3):269-88. doi: 10.1177/109019818801500303.

Participation in workplace health promotion programs: the contribution of health 
and organizational factors.

Sloan RP(1), Gruman JC.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Medicine Program, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, 
NY 10032.

Interest in workplace health promotion programs has raised important questions 
regarding these programs' ability to attract participants. Typically, 
participation has been examined as a function of personal characteristics of 
employees. But participation in a workplace health promotion program may be 
influenced as much by organizational characteristics as by health-related 
characteristics of employees. This preliminary study, conducted at AT&T 
Communications, used path analysis, a statistical technique for controlling for 
the effects of causally prior variables, to develop a model of participation. 
The influence of three sets of factors was detected: (1) Sex of employee was 
significant, with women more likely than men to participate in the program, (2) 
Increased perceived risk of illness led to decreased health satisfaction which 
in turn led to increased intention to change health habits culminating in 
increased participation, and (3) The organizational climate factor of perceived 
supportiveness of the supervisor contributed to participation. While several 
potential limitations require that these findings be replicated and extended, 
the study suggests that developers of workplace health promotion programs should 
attend to organizational work climate as well as personal health characteristics 
of employees in an effort to increase program impact.

DOI: 10.1177/109019818801500303
PMID: 3192406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nurs Stand. 1999 Nov 10-16;14(8):42-3. doi: 10.7748/cnp.v1.i8.pg30.

The effects of the hole in the ozone layer on health.

Sinclair J.

Depletion of the ozone layer is a factor in global climate change. This article 
focuses on its potential detrimental effects on health.

DOI: 10.7748/cnp.v1.i8.pg30
PMID: 11096860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Health Polit Policy Law. 1984 Fall;9(3):369-87. doi: 10.1215/03616878-9-3-369.

Health promotion, jogging, and the pursuit of the moral life.

Gillick MR.

Individual lifestyle was held accountable for health and disease throughout much 
of American history. Since the advent of the germ theory of disease, the focus 
on the etiology of disease has shifted to factors beyond individual control. But 
in the past two decades, there has been a resurgence of interest in the role of 
personal habits in producing sickness. This paper examines the history of one 
facet of the health promotion movement--aerobic exercise, primarily jogging. 
Initially, concepts in exercise physiology were adapted from non-medical 
fields--such as competitive sports and the military--for use in cardiac 
rehabilitation. Subsequently, a few physicians generalized their experience with 
cardiac patients to the general population, concluding that aerobic exercise 
could prevent heart attacks. This idea of exercise as a prophylaxis was seized 
upon by the public, who were receptive because of the political climate of the 
sixties. Once the popular movement was underway, researchers began studying the 
role of exercise in preventing coronary heart disease, confirming that exercise 
does confer some benefit. In the seventies, exercise attracted a new, wider 
audience--not because of the justification for its use provided by the 
scientific community, but because of the appeal of upright living as a means to 
personal and social redemption. The case of aerobic exercise provides an 
instructive example to social scientists and policymakers seeking to understand 
or to encourage widespread behavioral change.

DOI: 10.1215/03616878-9-3-369
PMID: 6392404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Med J Aust. 1991 Apr 15;154(8):554-9.

Potential health effects of greenhouse effect and ozone layer depletion in 
Australia.

Ewan C(1), Bryant EA, Calvert GD, Marthick J, Condon-Paoloni D.

Author information:
(1)University of Wollongong, NSW.

Comment in
    Med J Aust. 1991 Aug 5;155(3):207.
    Med J Aust. 1991 Apr 15;154(8):499-501.

OBJECTIVE: To identify potential health effects of the greenhouse effect and 
ozone layer depletion in Australia.
DATA SOURCES: Data were derived from a number of sources: (i) published articles 
accessed from relevant databases in the disciplines of health, public health and 
climatology over the past 20 years; (ii) published conference proceedings, 
review monographs and government reports covering the topic; (iii) a survey of 
experts in public health and climatology/geography (150 individuals were 
surveyed in the first phase with a 63% response rate); and (iv) a consensus 
conference in which 22 invited experts reviewed the results of the literature 
review and survey and a second conference in which 18 senior members of the 
health bureaucracy and public health profession considered the implications of 
the findings.
STUDY SELECTION: Over 200 published articles or monographs were reviewed. 
Criteria for selection were whether the papers contributed information to the 
objectives of the review.
DATA EXTRACTION: Because of the nature of the problem under investigation, 
predictions based on reasonable scientific assumptions were the major content of 
the review rather than conclusions based on scientific research.
DATA SYNTHESIS: The major predicted health effects of long-term climatic change 
in Australia are skin and eye damage from increased ultraviolet radiation 
exposure, increased incidence of some respiratory diseases, vector-borne and 
water-borne diseases, and the social and physical effects of natural hazards and 
social and economic restructuring. The most vulnerable groups include the aged, 
the very young, the chronically ill, those living in poorly designed 
neighbourhoods and those working in outdoor occupations or heavy industry.
CONCLUSIONS: The potential effects on health of long-term climatic change cover 
the broad spectrum of public health concerns. Detailed predictions of likely 
problems in specific geographic areas are not yet possible, but progressive 
development of such predictive capability is a high priority. Doctors will have 
an increasingly important role in monitoring local health status and 
participating in disease prevention and surveillance programmes.

PMID: 1750877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Ir Med J. 1994 May-Jun;87(3):82-3.

Aiming for health gain in the UK.

Doyle Y(1).

Author information:
(1)South East London Health Authority, King's College School of Medicine & 
Dentistry.

Health gain is a term describing an improvement in health status, arising from 
defined inputs. The focus on outcome is a welcome change from the traditional 
emphasis in the health sector on structures and process of care. Inputs include 
the spectrum of health care from primary prevention through to rehabilitation. 
The health gained from such interventions depends on the effectiveness of care 
and the willingness particularly of doctors to change practice to aspects of 
care of known benefit to patients. Relatively modest inputs in health care can 
lead to considerable health gain. This has economic implications in a climate of 
reducing resources for health care internationally. However at a population 
level, better health may result from inputs in sectors other than health, 
particularly education, housing and higher employment rates. The public also 
need a mechanism for becoming involved in the debate about improving their 
health. The developments to support health gain in the UK have opened up a 
challenging new era for the health services there.

PMID: 8056547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Health Educ Q. 1990 Fall;17(3):307-27. doi: 10.1177/109019819001700307.

Planning and implementing health promotion in the workplace: a case study of the 
Du Pont Company experience.

Bertera RL(1).

Author information:
(1)Employee Relations Department, Du Pont Company, Wilmington, DE 19898.

This case study describes the needs assessment, design, implementation, and 
preliminary evaluation of a comprehensive workplace health promotion program. 
The company had 110,000 U.S. employees at more than 100 locations engaged in a 
variety of manufacturing, research, sales, and support occupations in 1980. The 
PRECEDE framework was used to focus program planning and evaluation on key areas 
of health knowledge, attitudes, and behavior. The needs assessment included use 
of company morbidity and mortality data, a survey of medical and human resources 
staff, and a survey of employees, spouses, and pensioners. An in-house network 
of lay committees, site medical personnel, and corporate health education, 
nutrition and fitness specialists was used to staff critical program functions. 
Interventions included: public health approaches to program kick-off and health 
risk assessment; group and self-directed lifestyle change activities; 
recognition and awards; and workplace climate changes such as smoking policies 
that favor nonsmokers. One pilot location experienced a 47.5% decline in hourly 
employee absenteeism over six years versus a 12.5% decline in the total Du Pont 
hourly workforce. A number of lessons are discussed on how to improve the 
planning, implementation, institutionalization, and evaluation of health 
promotion programs in large industrial companies. Four areas where future 
research and practice should be focused include: reaching spouses, sales 
personnel, shiftworkers, and employees at small sites; balancing what is popular 
with what reduces risks over the long-term; documenting program impacts when 
research resources are scarce; and integrating health promotion programs with 
workplace medical, safety, employee assistance and benefits programs.

DOI: 10.1177/109019819001700307
PMID: 2228633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Nurses Staff Dev. 2000 Mar-Apr;16(2):49-54. doi: 
10.1097/00124645-200003000-00003.

Continuing education evaluation of behavior change.

Brunt BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Summa Health System, Akron, Ohio, USA.

Using the Cervero model of behavior change and questionnaires developed by 
Brigham, Ryan, and Elkins (1996), this study assessed the impact of a workshop 
on behavior change. Data on the individual professional (receptiveness), 
proposed change (feasibility), social system (climate), and program (quality), 
as well as self-report data about outcomes (expertise and actions) were 
included. Information on perceived expertise was obtained before the workshop, 
immediately after the workshop, and 3 months after the workshop. Information on 
actions initiated by the participants was obtained 3 months after the workshop. 
There were 70 participants in this study, with a variety of educational 
backgrounds and nursing experience. A matched test comparing expertise between 
time 1 and time 2, as well as time 1 and time 3 was significant at p = 0.00. 
There were significant correlations among the four variables influencing 
behavior change and actions and expertise. All except one participant in the 
study reported taking specific actions after the workshop. The mean number of 
actions taken was 4.0, with a range from 1 to 9. These findings indicate that a 
continuing education program can lead to behavior change.

DOI: 10.1097/00124645-200003000-00003
PMID: 11912691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Dent Educ. 1990 May;54(5):268-72.

Faculty status in a climate of change.

Kennedy JE(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Connecticut, School of Dental Medicine, Farmington.

Schools of dentistry that continue to conduct predoctoral dental education 
programs were surveyed to determine the status of full-time faculty and permit a 
comparison to responses made in 1980 to the identical survey. The response rate 
was 72.7 percent and included a representative distribution of schools. Since 
1980, there has been a decrease in the number of full-time clinical faculty 
while at the same time the proportion of clinical faculty with tenure has 
increased. The development of dual tracks and the appointment of full-time, 
nontenure-trackfaculty forecasted in 1980 has come to fruition. Such 
appointments represent an increasing proportion of clinical faculty. The mean 
age of faculty has not changed appreciably due primarily to early retirement, 
and the five-year turnover rate remains relatively constant at 33 percent. 
Dental schools, at least as reflected in the tenure review process, would appear 
to be imposing more stringent expectations for scholarship. This finding, 
coupled with the growing concern that in the future there will be a shortage of 
adequately trained clinical faculty capable of entering the mainstream of 
biomedical or behavioral research within academic health centers poses a 
challenge for all concerned with the viability of dental faculties.

PMID: 2335658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Prof Nurse. 2000 Jan;15(4):257-9.

What is the role of health promotion in nursing?

Whitehead D(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health, University of Hull.

There is much confusion about the philosophical assumptions underlying nursing 
and health promotion. Effective health promotion strategies are based on the 
concepts of patient empowerment and the need for equal working relationships. 
The cultural climate of nursing may have to change if these principles are to be 
successfully adopted.

PMID: 10983142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2000 Aug;34(4):586-93. doi: 
10.1080/j.1440-1614.2000.00718.x.

The Gatehouse Project: a systematic approach to mental health promotion in 
secondary schools.

Patton GC(1), Glover S, Bond L, Butler H, Godfrey C, Di Pietro G, Bowes G.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Adolescent Health, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia. patton@cryptic.rch.unimelb.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this paper is to outline the conceptual background 
and strategy of intervention for a systematic and sustainable approach to mental 
health promotion in secondary schools.
METHOD: The conceptual origins of the Gatehouse Project are described in terms 
of the epidemiology of adolescent mental health problems, attachment theory, 
education reform research and health promotional theory and practice. The 
elements of health promotional work are described in terms of structural change 
and priority setting; implementation at multiple levels within the participating 
schools is described.
RESULTS: The conceptual framework of the Gatehouse Project emphasises healthy 
attachments with peers and teachers through the promotion of a sense of security 
and trust, effective communication and a sense of positive self-regard based on 
participation in varied aspects of school and community life. A school social 
climate profile is derived from a questionnaire survey of students. An 
adolescent health team uses this information to set priorities for change within 
the school. Interventions may focus on the promotion of a positive social 
climate of the whole school or in the classroom. Curriculum-based health 
education is also used and based on materials that are relevant to the normal 
developmental experiences of teenagers. These are integrated into the mainstream 
curriculum and incorporate a strong component of teacher professional 
development. Lastly, the intervention promotes linkage between the school and 
broader community with a particular emphasis on the needs of young people at 
high risk of school drop-out.
CONCLUSIONS: Educational environments are complex systems undergoing continuous 
and simultaneous changes. The Gatehouse Project will provide unique information 
on the relationship between the social environment and the emotional wellbeing 
of young people. More importantly it outlines a sustainable process for building 
the capacity of schools to promote the social and emotional development of young 
people.

DOI: 10.1080/j.1440-1614.2000.00718.x
PMID: 10954389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. 2000 Nov-Dec;25(6):327-30. doi: 
10.1097/00005721-200011000-00010.

Advanced practice in maternal/child nursing: history, current status, and 
thoughts about the future.

Lewis JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Maternal Child Nursing Department, School of Nursing, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond 23298-0567, USA. jalewis@hsc.vcu.edu

Advanced practice nursing has undergone dramatic growth and change in during the 
past quarter century. Specialization in maternal/child health started with 
hospital-developed postlicensure programs which evolved into formal master's 
level programs. The first nurse-practitioner program in pediatrics was begun in 
1965 at the University of Colorado. The last 25 years has seen an increase in 
clinical specialization and in advanced practice roles within the specialties. 
The growth of credentials and types of certification available have provided 
opportunities for nurses, but have also created confusion for consumers and 
other health care professionals. Current challenges facing advanced practice 
nurses include issues related to legal authority for scope of practice, direct 
reimbursement for services, and prescriptive authority. The current health care 
climate provides challenges and opportunities for nurses in advanced practice.

DOI: 10.1097/00005721-200011000-00010
PMID: 11100655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Environ Health Perspect. 1998 Dec;106 Suppl 6(Suppl 6):1453-60. doi: 
10.1289/ehp.98106s61453.

Evaluation (not validation) of quantitative models.

Oreskes N(1).

Author information:
(1)Gallatin School of Individualized Study, New York University, New York, USA. 
noreskes@ucsd.edu

The present regulatory climate has led to increasing demands for scientists to 
attest to the predictive reliability of numerical simulation models used to help 
set public policy, a process frequently referred to as model validation. But 
while model validation may reveal useful information, this paper argues that it 
is not possible to demonstrate the predictive reliability of any model of a 
complex natural system in advance of its actual use. All models embed 
uncertainties, and these uncertainties can and frequently do undermine 
predictive reliability. In the case of lead in the environment, we may 
categorize model uncertainties as theoretical, empirical, parametrical, and 
temporal. Theoretical uncertainties are aspects of the system that are not fully 
understood, such as the biokinetic pathways of lead metabolism. Empirical 
uncertainties are aspects of the system that are difficult (or impossible) to 
measure, such as actual lead ingestion by an individual child. Parametrical 
uncertainties arise when complexities in the system are simplified to provide 
manageable model input, such as representing longitudinal lead exposure by 
cross-sectional measurements. Temporal uncertainties arise from the assumption 
that systems are stable in time. A model may also be conceptually flawed. The 
Ptolemaic system of astronomy is a historical example of a model that was 
empirically adequate but based on a wrong conceptualization. Yet had it been 
computerized--and had the word then existed--its users would have had every 
right to call it validated. Thus, rather than talking about strategies for 
validation, we should be talking about means of evaluation. That is not to say 
that language alone will solve our problems or that the problems of model 
evaluation are primarily linguistic. The uncertainties inherent in large, 
complex models will not go away simply because we change the way we talk about 
them. But this is precisely the point: calling a model validated does not make 
it valid. Modelers and policymakers must continue to work toward finding 
effective ways to evaluate and judge the quality of their models, and to develop 
appropriate terminology to communicate these judgments to the public whose 
health and safety may be at stake.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.98106s61453
PMCID: PMC1533451
PMID: 9860904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mutagenesis. 1992 Sep;7(5):321-7. doi: 10.1093/mutage/7.5.321.

Environmental effects of genotoxins (eco-genotoxicology).

W√ºrgler FE(1), Kramers PG.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Toxicology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Z√ºrich.

Genotoxic chemicals can damage the genetic material of humans as well as that of 
organisms living in the environment. With respect to adverse effects, 
alterations induced in the germ line, leading to alterations in the genetic 
make-up of populations, are of primary concern in ecosystems, because somatic 
changes, even if they lead to a loss of individuals, will not be critical in 
populations with a large reproductive surplus. This is different in human 
toxicology where genetic alterations in germ cells as well as in somatic cells 
of any individual are of concern. Increased frequencies of mutations and related 
genetic alterations in the gene pools of individual species or populations in 
ecosystems have to be judged against the background of spontaneous mutations 
that have enabled species to survive and adapt in changing environments since 
the beginning of life on our planet, and which have played an important role as 
the substrate for evolutionary developments. Examples of the selection of 
altered phenotypes (and genotypes) in response to environmental pollution and 
environmental stress are melanism in moth populations, metal resistance in 
plants, insecticide resistance in insects and malaria resistance in humans. 
Pollution, in general, can represent a stress factor selectively leading to a 
change in genetic make-up. In addition, environmental genotoxins can directly 
alter gene pools. A change in the genetic constitution may be advantageous for 
certain populations living in stressful conditions, but may present a 
disadvantage for others, including man.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1093/mutage/7.5.321
PMID: 1470026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. People Planet. 1997;6(3):14-7.

The threatened plague.

Epstein P.

PIP: This article discusses changes in disease patterns affecting human health 
that may be related to environmental and social changes in the world. The World 
Health Report reveals that 30 new diseases emerged in the past 20 years. Old 
diseases are becoming resistant to new drugs. Infectious diseases that were in 
decline are spreading: diphtheria, whooping cough, and measles. Illnesses such 
as malaria, fevers, cholera, and rodent-borne viruses are becoming more 
frequent. Diseases that are transmitted by animals or water are related to 
environmental and social changes. Degraded environments are susceptible to the 
appearance of opportunistic species, such as weeds, rodents, insects, and 
microorganisms. Stable environments support the welfare of large predators and 
control opportunistic species. Owls, coyotes, and snakes eat rodents that carry 
Lyme disease ticks and a variety of viruses, plague, and bacteria. Reptiles, 
birds, spiders, ladybugs, bats, and fish consume larvae and mosquitoes that 
cause malaria and fevers. Habitat loss and fragmentation, monocultures, 
excessive use of toxic chemicals, climate change, and weather instability are 
widespread global changes that reduce the predator population. Small wilderness 
habitats favor pests. Monocultures reduce genetic diversity and increase 
vulnerability. Excessive use of pesticides harms birds and helpful insects. A 
sign of a failing ecosystem is the population explosion of pests and 
disequilibrium. The Environmental Distress Syndrome is characterized as: 1) 
emerging infectious diseases, 2) loss of biodiversity, 3) increased generalist 
species and decreased specialist species, 4) declines in specific specialists, 
such as pollinators responsible for preservation of flowering plants, and 5) 
increased coastal algal blooms. The impacts of disease mean considerable costs 
to humans, agriculture, and livestock. Loss of resources is also costly.

PMID: 12321043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Clin Perinatol. 1985 Jun;12(2):391-406.

Teenage mothers and their infants.

Badger E.

The outcomes of the IS/MT pilot project and the expanded services program as 
well as program replications in other geographic areas suggest that efforts to 
support the teenage mother in the care of her firstborn infant can have a 
demonstrable effect. Completing school, securing employment, going off welfare, 
and acting on a decision to prevent subsequent unwanted pregnancies were all 
secondary effects of a 20-week postnatal mother-infant class program designed to 
positively influence infant development. Similar treatment effects have been 
reported by IS/MT replications in St. Louis and Genesee County, Michigan. Other 
program innovations, however, lacking the funds and/or the expertise to conduct 
adequate evaluations, are nonetheless significant because they provide a 
groundswell capable of establishing a climate for social change. At the 
community level, this is expressed in the creation of new service paradigms, as 
in Norfolk and Memphis, where individuals and agencies are transformed and 
experiment with new solutions to thorny problems. At the national level, it is 
expressed in coalitions and political alliances around a single issue, as with 
the Children's Defense Fund and adolescent and single-parent families. As one 
who has spent almost 20 years addressing the consequences of teenage parenthood, 
it is heartening to know that the time is near to address the prevention of the 
problem. Let us hope that the Children's Defense Fund agenda accurately reflects 
the beliefs and feelings of the majority of our citizenry and that our national 
priorities will change to include the reduction of teen pregnancy and teen 
parenthood.

PMID: 2410176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Gac Sanit. 1994 Mar-Apr;8(41):79-84. doi: 10.1016/s0213-9111(94)71176-6.

[The work climate among primary care workers].

[Article in Spanish]

Arce Arnaez MA, Mart√≠nez Aguayo C, S√°nchez Lude√±a ML.

The social organizational climate is a psychological variable which influences 
the behaviour of the people at work. With the aim of knowing and measuring the 
work environment in primary health care (Sector 11, Madrid), a transversal 
descriptive study has been performed on a sample of 350 people. We have used the 
survey WES (Work social environment scale), validated in Spain, which evaluates 
the dimensions: relationships, self-satisfaction and stability/change through 10 
subscales, in which a mark is obtained and profiles are created. We show the 
results of all the subscales and the analysed profiles according to professional 
establishments and assistance models (health centres and clinics). All the 
profiles show values over the average. The subscale which measures the 
organization shows the highest levels, and the one which measures pressure and 
control, the lowest. We conclude to value the organizational climate in primary 
health care as positive, with a relative homogeneity between establishments and 
centres. The knowledge of the behaviour and attitudes of the workers is basic 
when planning staff policy.

DOI: 10.1016/s0213-9111(94)71176-6
PMID: 7713680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Nurs Educ. 2000 Jan;39(1):5-12.

The future of nursing education.

Linderman CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Oregon Health Sciences University, School of Nursing, Portland, USA.

Market-driven economic policy, dramatic technology developments, changing 
demographics, and the knowledge explosion are rapidly changing health care and 
educational institutions as well as creating a climate of continuous rapid 
change. Nursings' contract with society requires the profession to be responsive 
to these changes. Four views of changes in nursing practice and therefore 
nursing education are presented. Changes in the role of faculty and in the 
nature of the curriculum are described. Twelve strategies for facilitating 
change are listed.

PMID: 10647019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Int J Group Psychother. 1993 Oct;43(4):439-51. doi: 
10.1080/00207284.1993.11491237.

Character change in group therapy.

Alonso A(1), Rutan JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School.

The treatment of character pathology in group therapy becomes ever more relevant 
in the current climate of health care delivery with the mounting awareness of 
the importance of the long-term treatment needed for such problems. This article 
reviews the psychodynamic meanings of character pathology and addresses the 
specific ways that psychodynamic group therapy is suited to its treatment. 
Clinical examples are offered to illustrate how the resolution of character 
difficulties occurs in group therapy.

DOI: 10.1080/00207284.1993.11491237
PMID: 8244596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Circumpolar Health. 2000 Apr;59(2):114-21.

Predisposing factors and prevention of frostbite.

Rintam√§ki H(1).

Author information:
(1)Oulu Regional Institute of Occupational Health, Finland.

This review focuses on the physiological, behavioural and environmental factors 
which predispose to frostbite. Also prevention of frostbite is summarised. 
Predisposing factors may increase heat loss, decrease heat production, decrease 
the insulation of the clothing, make people especially susceptible to cold or 
make them to behave inadequately. Marked increase in convective or conductive 
heat loss is often the immediate reason for frostbite. Wind (as described by 
wind chill index) increases convective heat loss and touching of metal objects 
increases conductive cooling. Poor insulation of the clothing is also a common 
reason of frostbite. The insulation can be insufficient when clothing is wet, 
tight, permeable to wind or does not cover the cold sensitive body parts. 
Individual factors predisposing to frostbite are inadequate behaviour, low 
physical fitness, fatigue, dehydration, earlier cold injuries, sickness or poor 
circulation in peripheral parts of the body. Frostbite is often associated with 
the use of alcohol. To prevent frostbite, it is necessary to recognise cold 
risks, practise tasks in the cold, eat and drink well, have physical exercise, 
have sufficient clothing (also spare clothing), change into dry clothing if 
necessary and take care of companions. In the cold it is not advisable to get 
fatigued until exhaustion, sweat excessively, use tight and/or wet clothing, 
drink alcohol, smoke and expose oneself unnecessarily to wind, metals or fluids.

PMID: 10998828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Can Fam Physician. 1985 Nov;31:2121-3.

Diabetes and travel.

Ross SA.

Travel can be therapeutic, but for the diabetic patient, it necessitates careful 
preparation. The family physician should be coordinator of the team that 
prepares the patient for the trip. The patient is a central member of this team, 
and must know as much as possible about the places to be visited, modes of 
transportation, facilities, etc. Current medication must be reviewed, and 
possible medical problems anticipated, taking climate and change of exercise 
pattern into account. Careful attention must be paid to current medical problems 
with good education concerning potential emergencies. Diabetes therapy during 
travelling times and the holiday must be carefully reviewed with the patient. 
The necessary referrals to other physicians and health professionals involved in 
the care of diabetes should be arranged well in advance of the holiday. Every 
assistance must be given to the patient to help him travel with diabetes-not 
from it.

PMCID: PMC2327747
PMID: 21274129


103. Finance Dev. 1992 Jun;29(2):22-3.

Environmental problems and developing countries.

[No authors listed]

PIP: The status of environmental conditions for forests, soils, water, air, and 
atmospheric changes is presented for developing countries. Loss and degradation 
of forests continue. The rate of cutting of moist tropical forests is 17-20 
million hectares/year. The consequences would be eventual total destruction 
within several generations, lost soil and watershed protection, local climate 
change, and habitat destruction. The human toll can also be great as seen by the 
flooding deaths of 5000 Philippine villagers. Soil erosion is a greater danger 
than desertification. In sub-Saharan Africa, total harvest and yields of 
important food crops have declined compared to increases elsewhere in the world. 
In countries such as Costa Rica, Malawi, Mali, and Mexico the soil losses 
approximate .5-1.5% of gross domestic product annually. Progress has been made 
in water purification, but there are still nearly 1 million people in the 
developing world without access to clean water for drinking and bathing. 1.7 
billion have inadequate sanitation. Access to sanitation in urban areas is on 
the rise. Waterborne diseases are a result of poor sanitation: 900 million cases 
of diarrheal disease/year, 500 million with trachoma, 200 million with 
schistosomiasis, or bilharzia, and 900 million from hookworm. Other diseases 
resulting from improper sanitation are cholera, typhoid, and paratyphoid. Water 
scarcity is another problem. Air quality is threatened by dust and smoke 
pollution which contribute to respiratory illnesses, by indoor burning of wood 
and charcoal particularly in rural Africa and south Asia, and high levels of 
lead from automobile emissions. Hundreds of thousands of people are affected 
through increased illness and even loss of mental functioning as in the case of 
lead poisoning. Atmospheric changes such as ozone depletion or global warming 
may not show their impact until decades later. The consequences are high levels 
of ultraviolet radiation which cause cancers, cataracts, and possibly immune 
system damage, and temperature increases which will increase the levels of the 
seas.

PMID: 12285660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Parasitol. 2000 Nov;30(12-13):1395-405. doi: 
10.1016/s0020-7519(00)00141-7.

Effects of environmental change on emerging parasitic diseases.

Patz JA(1), Graczyk TK, Geller N, Vittor AY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Hygiene and Public Health, 615 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore MD 21205-2179, USA. 
jpatz@jhsph.edu

Ecological disturbances exert an influence on the emergence and proliferation of 
malaria and zoonotic parasitic diseases, including, Leishmaniasis, 
cryptosporidiosis, giardiasis, trypanosomiasis, schistosomiasis, filariasis, 
onchocerciasis, and loiasis. Each environmental change, whether occurring as a 
natural phenomenon or through human intervention, changes the ecological balance 
and context within which disease hosts or vectors and parasites breed, develop, 
and transmit disease. Each species occupies a particular ecological niche and 
vector species sub-populations are distinct behaviourally and genetically as 
they adapt to man-made environments. Most zoonotic parasites display three 
distinct life cycles: sylvatic, zoonotic, and anthroponotic. In adapting to 
changed environmental conditions, including reduced non-human population and 
increased human population, some vectors display conversion from a primarily 
zoophyllic to primarily anthrophyllic orientation. Deforestation and ensuing 
changes in landuse, human settlement, commercial development, road construction, 
water control systems (dams, canals, irrigation systems, reservoirs), and 
climate, singly, and in combination have been accompanied by global increases in 
morbidity and mortality from emergent parasitic disease. The replacement of 
forests with crop farming, ranching, and raising small animals can create 
supportive habitats for parasites and their host vectors. When the land use of 
deforested areas changes, the pattern of human settlement is altered and habitat 
fragmentation may provide opportunities for exchange and transmission of 
parasites to the heretofore uninfected humans. Construction of water control 
projects can lead to shifts in such vector populations as snails and mosquitoes 
and their parasites. Construction of roads in previously inaccessible forested 
areas can lead to erosion, and stagnant ponds by blocking the flow of streams 
when the water rises during the rainy season. The combined effects of 
environmentally detrimental changes in local land use and alterations in global 
climate disrupt the natural ecosystem and can increase the risk of transmission 
of parasitic diseases to the human population.

DOI: 10.1016/s0020-7519(00)00141-7
PMID: 11113264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Gesundheitswesen. 2000 Dec;62(12):660-4. doi: 10.1055/s-2000-10431.

[Insufficient ventilation as the etiology of illness perception in an elementary 
school].

[Article in German]

Kimmel R(1), Dartsch PC, Hildenbrand S, Wodarz R, Schmahl FW.

Author information:
(1)Institut f√ºr Arbeits- und Sozialmedizin der Universit√§t T√ºbingen. 
reiner.kimmel@uni-tuebingen.de

PURPOSE: Two years after renovation of the classrooms in a primary school 
(installation of insulated windows and closing of the ventilation shaft) pupils 
and teachers complained about offensive odours, irritation of the eyes and of 
the nose, complaints of the respiratory tract, headaches and disturbed mental 
concentration. The presented study determines the causes, suggests measures for 
help and checks their effectiveness by means of measurements.
METHODS: Before starting our measurements, the air quality had already been 
assessed by an expert. There was no evidence of elevated concentrations of air 
contaminants. Because of the content of phthalate plasticizers and flame 
retardants in the linoleum sealants there was an offensive odour. To determine 
the cause, the air in the subjective mostly affected classroom was analysed for 
phthalate plasticizers, their metabolites and alkyl phosphates. We also made 
aerosol measurements with a cascade impactor, determined bacterial counts in the 
air, and measured the indoor climate and the internal air flow.
RESULTS: The concentrations of phthalate plasticizers and their metabolites in 
the air were not elevated significantly. The screening for alkyl phosphates was 
negative. The amount of inhalable particles was 0.046 mg/m3. The bacterial count 
in the air was negligible. On the other hand the indoor climate during the 
heating period in winter was remarkably changed. The average room temperature 
was 26 degrees C (reaching a maximum of 36 degrees C with direct sunlight in the 
classroom), the average humidity was 21% (minimum 7%) and the change of air was 
approximately 0.5 per hour. Reopening the ventilation shaft and tilting of only 
one window resulted in a much greater rate of air change. After installation of 
temperature regulators and regular use of the venetian blinds in the classroom, 
the room temperature and the relative humidity during the morning lessons were, 
as a rule, normalised. Among both pupils and teachers the reports of offensive 
odours and health disorders were subsequently clearly reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: To determine the cause of health disorders indoors, it is 
apparently to be of great importance to carry out measurements of the climate as 
well as to assess the level of air contaminants. By use of modern energy-saving 
construction possible effects on the indoor climate should be be taken into 
account during the planning stage of changes to avoid health disorders resulting 
from changed interior climate conditions.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2000-10431
PMID: 11199202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Environ Health Perspect. 1997 Nov;105(11):1186-91. doi: 10.1289/ehp.971051186.

Seeing the forests for the more than the trees.

Taylor D.

Assessing the health effects of deforestation is difficult because of the rate 
at which the world's forests are disappearing. From 1990 to 1995 alone, the 
world lost a total area of forest cover nearly twice the size of Italy. 
Deforestation, which is caused by human population growth and encroachment, 
clearance for agricultural production, and the growing worldwide demand for wood 
products, has been linked with effects ranging from local changes in climatic 
and disease patterns to global climate change and biodiversity loss. 
Deforestation is responsible for about 25% of net annual releases of carbon 
dioxide into the atmosphere and also lessens the amount of forest available to 
absorb greenhouse gas emissions. Deforestation also causes a tremendous loss of 
biodiversity worldwide. It is estimated that over the next 50 years 
deforestation will rank as the single greatest cause of species loss.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.971051186
PMCID: PMC1470324
PMID: 9370516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Fam Pract. 2000 Apr;17(2):197-202. doi: 10.1093/fampra/17.2.197.

Nutrition and the health care agenda: a primary care perspective.

Moore H(1), Adamson AJ, Gill T, Waine C.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Primary Care, Nuffield Institute for Health, 
University of Leeds, 71-75 Clarendon Road, Leeds LS2 9PL, UK.

The current climate of prioritizing in the NHS brings into focus the debate 
surrounding efficient and effective management of conditions associated with the 
modern lifestyle. In any such debate, nutrition should be considered a primary 
issue as there is now international consensus regarding the optimum diet for the 
prevention of both coronary heart disease and cancer. Over recent years, 
government has stated that primary care is in an ideal setting to provide 
nutrition education to the public. However, we present the case that there 
currently is a mismatch between the attitude of the public, who appear willing 
to accept dietary advice from primary care professionals, and the reluctance on 
behalf of these professionals to fulfil this role. Dissatisfaction with the 
quality of nutrition education received by those working in primary care is 
often cited as a barrier to providing dietary advice to patients. With that in 
mind, we go on to discuss educational strategies that may motivate primary care 
staff to increase their involvement in providing dietary advice for their 
patients. The challenge to those involved in the delivery of nutrition training 
to primary care professionals is to convince them that dietary intervention is 
worthwhile and that they can make a positive contribution to dietary change 
within the current organization of primary care. Increasing motivation is an 
essential outcome of such training, along with providing the skills and 
knowledge to fulfil this role. The contribution which diet could make is 
significant and, in this time of questioning priorities, the role of nutrition 
needs to be put firmly on the health care agenda.

DOI: 10.1093/fampra/17.2.197
PMID: 10758086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Semin Neurol. 2000;20(2):247-53. doi: 10.1055/s-2000-9834.

Hazards of bicycling: from handlebars to lightning.

Cherington M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine and 
Lightning Data Center, Centura Health-St. Anthony Hospital, Denver 80204-1374, 
USA.

The bicycle, an invention that provides joy and transportation to millions of 
people, can also be a source of disabling injuries and death. The victims of 
bicycle accidents are usually in good health and often young. Most of the fatal 
head injury cases are teenagers. In this article, I have chosen four areas of 
bicycle trauma that frequently brings the bicycle patient to the attention of a 
neurologist. These areas are (1) head trauma as a consequence of road 
collisions; (2) compressive ulnar neuropathy; (3) impotence, probably due to 
compression of the pudendal nerve or its branches; and (4) lightning-related 
bicycle injuries. The one thing that all four categories have in common is that 
they are often preventable. Helmet usage and common sense would lower the number 
of serious head trauma cases by 50%. Compressive ulnar and pudendal neuropathies 
can be prevented or reduced if the cyclist would frequently change his or her 
position in relation to the handlebar and saddle. In the majority of cases of 
compressive neuropathies, the symptoms improve if the patient takes a holiday 
from bike riding. Lightning injuries can be avoided or lessened if the cyclist 
takes proactive measures to limit his or her exposure during thunderstorms. 
These proactive measures include knowing the climate patterns of the area and 
knowing where the nearest safe shelter is located.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2000-9834
PMID: 10946745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Artif Life. 1997 Summer;3(3):213-36. doi: 10.1162/artl.1997.3.3.213.

Modeling malaria as a complex adaptive system.

Janssen MA(1), Martens WJ.

Author information:
(1)Bureau for Environmental Assessment (MNV), National Institute for Public 
Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, The Netherlands. 
Marco.Janssen@rivm.nl

As the resistance of the malaria parasite to antimalarial drugs continues to 
increase, as does that of the malarial mosquito to insecticides, the efficacy of 
efforts to control malaria in many tropical countries is diminishing. This 
trend, together with the projected consequences of climate change, may prove to 
exacerbate substantially the significance of malaria in the coming decades. In 
this article we introduce the use of an evolutionary modeling approach to 
simulate the adaptation of mosquitoes and parasites to the available pesticides 
and drugs. By coupling genetic algorithms with a dynamic malaria-epidemiological 
model, we derive a complex adaptive system capable of simulating adapting and 
evolving processes within both the mosquito and the parasite populations. This 
approach is used to analyze malaria management strategies appropriate to regions 
of higher and lower degrees of endemicity. The results suggest that adequate use 
of insecticides and drugs may reduce the occurrence of malaria in regions of low 
endemicity, although increased efforts would be necessary in the event of a 
climate change. However, our model indicates that in regions of high endemicity 
the use of insecticides and drugs may lead to an increase in incidence due to 
enhanced resistance development. Projected climate change, on the other hand, 
may lead to a limited reduction of the occurrence of malaria due to the presence 
of a higher percentage of immune persons in the older age class.

DOI: 10.1162/artl.1997.3.3.213
PMID: 9385735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Holist Nurs. 1998 Mar;16(1):57-67. doi: 10.1177/089801019801600108.

Differentiating holistic practice and speculations for future directions.

Wardell DW(1), Engebretson J.

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, University of Texas Houston Health Science Center, USA.

Technological advances and economic, social, and cultural conditions have 
created a climate of change in health care. New roles and approaches are 
developing in relation to the holistic health movement. Within the holistic 
nursing community, three concepts of holistic practice have emerged. 
Differentiations among (a) certified holistic nurses, (b) practitioners of a 
healing modality, and (c) healers are presented to promote future discussion. As 
new roles must match a social need and become institutionalized to secure a 
professional role, speculations on possible directions for the certification in 
holistic nursing are presented.

DOI: 10.1177/089801019801600108
PMID: 9555381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Telemed J. 1998 Fall;4(3):199-205. doi: 10.1089/tmj.1.1998.4.199.

Telemedicine and telehealth in Canada: forty years of change in the use of 
information and communications technologies in a publicly administered health 
care system.

Picot J(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Communications, McGill University, and Infotelmed 
Communications Inc., Montr√©al, Qu√©bec, Canada.

The Canadian climate and geography are particularly well suited to the adoption 
of communications technologies for long-distance medical care and education. 
Canada has a long history of use of telemedicine applications, and in recent 
years, the number and variety of telehealth activities in Canada have increased 
dramatically. Using information gathered for a competitive framework study of 
the telehealth industry in Canada, this article documents these changes. The 
trends observed have been encouraged by the development of provincial and 
national infrastructure for the health information highway, changes in the 
health care system, increased technological capacity and speed, and government 
intervention and assistance. The pace of growth is apparent in the increases in 
the number of projects, the number of companies offering telehealth products and 
services, the adoption by public organizations of telehealth technologies for a 
wider range of applications, and the increasing amount of research being 
undertaken. The article concludes with comments on the role of government 
intervention in fostering these developments.

DOI: 10.1089/tmj.1.1998.4.199
PMID: 9831745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Indian J Malariol. 1992 Sep;29(3):129-60.

Malaria in the WHO Southeast Asia region.

Kondrashin AV.

PIP: Malaria endemic countries in the southeast Asia region include Bangladesh, 
Bhutan, India, Indonesia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Thailand. 
Population movement and rapid urbanization, both largely caused by unemployment, 
and environmental deterioration change the malaria pattern. They also increase 
the incidence of drug-resistant malaria, especially resistance to 
4-aminoquinolines. In India, Plasmodium falciparum is linked to the density and 
distribution of tribals, and, in southern Thailand, rubber tappers have the 
highest malaria incidence rate (46.29%). Since the population is young and the 
young are highly sensitive to malaria infection, the region has low community 
immunity. High malaria priority areas are forests, forested hills, forest fringe 
areas, developmental project sites, and border areas. High risk groups include 
infants, young children, pregnant women, and mobile population groups. Malaria 
incidence is between 2.5-2.8 million cases, and the slide positivity rate is 
about 3%. P. falciparum constitutes 40% for all malaria cases. In 1988 in India, 
there were 222 malaria deaths. Malaria is the 7th most common cause of death in 
Thailand. 3 of the 19 Anopheline species are resistant to at least 1 
insecticide, particularly DDT. Posteradication epidemics surfaced in the 
mid-1970s. Malaria control programs tend to use the primary health care and 
integration approach to malaria control. Antiparasite measures range from a 
single-dose of an antimalarial to mass drug administration. Residual spraying 
continues to be the main strategy of vector control. Some other vector control 
measures are fish feeding on mosquito larvae, insecticide impregnated mosquito 
nets, and repellents. Control programs also have health education activities. 
India allocates the highest percentage of its total health budget to malaria 
control (21.54%). Few malariology training programs exist in the region. Slowly 
processed surveillance data limit the countries' ability to forecast and to 
combat malaria epidemics. Almost all control programs have a special research 
unit but capabilities are limited. Political commitment is needed to control 
malaria.

PMID: 1286730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Community Health. 1993 Feb;18(1):37-47. doi: 10.1007/BF01321519.

Towards a new system of health: the challenge of Western disease.

Temple NJ(1), Burkitt DP.

Author information:
(1)Animal Sciences Division, Alberta Environmental Centre, Vegreville, Canada.

Over the last three decades, the concept of Western disease has become well 
established. Medicine has approached this group of diseases by searching for new 
cures but has achieved relatively little success. We argue that medicine should 
now accept the failure of this strategy and place a major emphasis on 
prevention. The key objective is to change the climate of opinion so that 
prevention is taken seriously by the general population. The chief activity 
should be a wide ranging public education campaign so as to persuade people to 
live a healthier lifestyle. Medicine will require restructuring in order to 
carry out this work. Medical education needs to be reformed so that medical 
students receive the necessary training. This must be done as part of an 
integrated approach in which government, industry and medical research all play 
a major role. Governments should use taxation and subsidies in areas such as 
food and tobacco so as to shift consumption patterns towards healthier products. 
Governments must also tighten laws on tobacco sales and advertising, support 
health education, and improve food labelling. Industry must be made far more 
responsive to the health needs of the population. This should be done both by 
public education, so as to alter demand, and by government action. Medical 
research should change its emphasis from studying the detailed mechanisms of 
disease ("complex research") to studying the role of lifestyle factors ("simple 
research").

DOI: 10.1007/BF01321519
PMID: 8450092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 1995 Mar;1(2):150-4.

Tobacco smoking and new developments in public health and clinical 
interventions.

Jorenby DE(1), Fiore MC.

Author information:
(1)Center for Tobacco Research and Intervention, University of Wisconsin Medical 
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The public policy environment regarding tobacco use in the United States has 
experienced a dramatic change during the past year. Along with calls for 
regulatory review of cigarettes, important new scientific information has become 
available regarding the health effects of environmental tobacco smoke and the 
efficacy of nicotine replacement therapy, which is used to support smoking 
cessation efforts. Specifically, recent studies have suggested that 
environmental tobacco smoke exposure increases risk for coronary heart disease 
in nonsmoking adults in addition to causing lung cancer and other respiratory 
diseases. Children are exposed to environmental tobacco smoke at home and in 
public, resulting in increased risk of bronchitis, pneumonia, bronchial 
hyperresponsivity, and sudden infant death syndrome. In a climate of increasing 
concern about the direct and indirect effects of tobacco smoke, three 
independent meta-analyses concluded that nicotine replacement therapy increased 
smoking cessation efficacy two- to threefold. In addition, research is beginning 
to identify factors associated with successful and unsuccessful cessation 
attempts using nicotine replacement therapy, resulting in the possibility of 
individualized treatments and clinical interventions designed for maximum 
efficacy.

PMID: 15786605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Adv Nurs. 1998 Aug;28(2):419-27. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.1998.00635.x.

The new ward manager: an evaluation of the changing role of the charge nurse.

Willmot M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Postgraduate Medicine, University of Glasgow, Scotland.

Erratum in
    J Adv Nurs 1999 Jan;29(1):8.

Changes in health service policy and in the structure of nursing have made 
charge nurses into ward managers with the autonomy and power to improve the 
quality and effectiveness of patient care. In a climate where clinical 
effectiveness and quality of care are seen as central to the provision of 
appropriate health care, this study explores the experiences of one National 
Health Service trust in implementing this change in the charge nurse's role, and 
in doing so highlights the importance of effective change management. Nurse 
managers were interviewed and all ward-based G grade (range A-I) charge nurses 
within the trust were sent a questionnaire to ascertain: the level of 
satisfaction with the way the changes had been introduced; whether they were in 
favour of the changes; and if they had sufficient time, knowledge, resources, 
preparation and support to enable them to undertake their new role. A random 
sample of charge nurses were also interviewed. It was found that the majority of 
charge nurses (61%) were in favour of the development of their role, believing 
it to be both inevitable and necessary. However, many felt that the change 
process had been managed ineffectively. There had been insufficient consultation 
during the change process, preparation and support were perceived as inadequate, 
the roles of the various protagonists were often unclear, and the lack of 
supernumerary status led to role conflict and confusion. As a consequence the 
new ward managers were often unable to fulfil the true potential of this 
demanding but exciting role.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.1998.00635.x
PMID: 9725741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Ciba Found Symp. 1993;175:124-41; discussion 141-5. doi: 
10.1002/9780470514436.ch8.

Arthropods as disease vectors in a changing environment.

Sutherst RW(1).

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Division of Entomology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.

Arthropod vectors need to acquire energy, moisture, hosts and shelter from their 
environment. Changing human populations and industrialization affect almost 
every aspect of the environment. In particular, the prospects of climatic 
warming, urbanization and vegetation changes have the potential to materially 
affect global patterns of vector-borne diseases. Global warming will enable the 
expansion of the geographical distributions of vectors. The population dynamics 
of vectors will change in response to extended seasons suitable for development 
followed by less severe winters. The incidence of epidemics is likely to change 
in response to an expected disproportionate increase in the frequency of extreme 
climatic events. The impact of such changes on each of the major vector-borne 
diseases is reviewed and projections are made on the likely global areas at risk 
from spread of disease vectors. Research needs are identified and response 
strategies are suggested in the context of the ever-increasing impact of human 
populations and industrial activity on the environment.

DOI: 10.1002/9780470514436.ch8
PMID: 8222987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Am Diet Assoc. 1977 Jun;70(6):596-601.

Coordinated education in dietetics.

Lewis MN, Beaudette TM.

Details essential in implementing coordinated education in the preparation of 
the professional dietitian are described. Consideration is given to semantics, 
with clarification of terms posing problems in the smooth evolution of 
coordinated programs. Four phases of transition from the traditional to the 
coordinated process are illustrated: (a) Integration of the clinical phase into 
the undergraduate years; (b) interrelation of subject matter among departmental 
courses; (c) trans-disciplinary coordination; and (d) on-going evaluation of the 
curriculum in terms of professional practice. Also addressed are barriers to 
change in professional education. The ultimate goals are a balance between 
standardization and accountability and a climate in which academia has the 
liberty to meet demands in an innovative fashion.

PMID: 864150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Annu Rev Nutr. 1994;14:495-533. doi: 10.1146/annurev.nu.14.070194.002431.

Transthyretin (prealbumin) in health and disease: nutritional implications.

Ingenbleek Y(1), Young V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Sciences, University Louis-Pasteur, Illkirch, Strasbourg, 
France.

The name "transthyretin" reflects the dual physiological roles of this 
tetrameric unglycosylated plasma protein. TTR is one of three specific carrier 
proteins involved in the transport of both thyroid hormones and of retinol 
through the mediation of RBP. TTR is a product of the visceral compartment, and 
its hepatic synthesis is exquisititely sensitive to both the adequacy and levels 
of protein and energy intakes--hence the proposal of TTR as a nutritional 
marker. To date, 38 TTR variants have been described, most of which are 
associated with variable degrees of cardiac and/or neural tissue amyloid 
deposits. All known variants arise from a single AA substitution due to single 
point mutation in the coding region of the TTR gene. Under acute stress 
conditions, the synthesis of TTR, RBP, and CBG is abruptly depressed by a 
cytokine-directed orchestration of new metabolic priorities, with a 
redistribution of organ and tissue protein pools. It is proposed that TTR, RBP, 
and CBG behave as acute-booster reactants (ABRs), actively participating in the 
cascade of metabolic events characterizing the stress reaction along pathways 
best explained by the free hormone/vitamin hypothesis. The latter is governed by 
the law of mass action--the spontaneous dissociation and instant uptake by 
hepatocytes of the ligands freed from their specific carrier proteins, which 
creates a transient hyperthyroid, hyperretinoid, and hypercortisolic climate. 
This response generally does not exceed four or five days because the initial 
impact of injury normally subsides, but it may last longer if complications 
occur. The magnitude and adequacy of the stress responses depend on the 
preceding nutritional status as assessed by TTR plasma levels and are 
proportionate to the severity of insult. Clinical, animal, and molecular studies 
concur to demonstrate the dualistic stimulatory or inhibitory effects triggered 
by the ligands, whose unmetabolized fractions are excreted in the urinary 
output. Thyroid hormones and retinoids appear to control the early maturation 
processes and the synthesis of primary transcripts, whereas cortisol 
preferentially modulates the secondary responses and confers a protective effect 
on healthy tissues. During acute stress, the evolutionary patterns of visceral 
proteins and inflammatory markers exhibit compulsory mirror images. However, 
they change in independent ways under more chronic circumstances. A relatively 
simple biochemical micromethod based on the simultaneous measurement of plasma 
TTR, albumin, CRP, and orosomucoid aggregated into a PINI is proposed for the 
early recognition and follow-up of both nutritional and inflammatory facets of 
the disease spectrum.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.nu.14.070194.002431
PMID: 7946531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Sch Health. 1999 Nov;69(9):376-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1746-1561.1999.tb06433.x.

Influence of school organizational characteristics on the outcomes of a school 
health promotion program.

Cullen KW(1), Baranowski T, Baranowski J, Hebert D, deMoor C, Hearn MD, Resnicow 
K.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Researchers assessed the possible moderating effects of school organizational 
characteristics (school climate, school health, and job satisfaction) on 
outcomes of a teacher health behavior change program. Thirty-two public schools 
were matched and randomly assigned either to treatment or control conditions. 
Organizational, dietary, and physiologic data were collected from third to fifth 
grade teachers over three years. Treatment schools received a teacher wellness 
program for two years. Psychometrics of most organizational scales achieved 
acceptable levels of reliability. Mixed model analyses were conducted to test 
for moderating effects. Treatment schools with high organizational climate and 
health scores reported higher fruit and juice and vegetable consumption at Year 
2 compared with intervention schools with low scores. Treatment schools with 
high job satisfaction scores reported higher fruit and juice and lower-fat food 
consumption at Year 3 compared with intervention schools with low scores. These 
measures may be used as a tool to assess the environment in which school health 
promotion programs are presented. Future interventions may need to be tailored 
to the organizational characteristics of schools.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1746-1561.1999.tb06433.x
PMID: 10633323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dev Commun Rep. 1984 Mar;(45):16,15.

Perspectives on communication problems in the English-speaking Caribbean.

Okwesa BA.

PIP: The Caribbean is experiencing a host of serious socioeconomic problems that 
prevent the majority of the population from realizing and maintaining a 
satisfactory standard of living. Food and Nutrition Surveys of some countries 
identified a lack of information on health, food, and nutrition as a primary 
reason for the prevalence of malnutrition, infectious diseases, and nutrition 
related diseases. "Misinformation" creates an often insurmountable barrier to 
effective communication between source and receiver, in this case the health, 
food, and nutrition sector and the wider community. Misinformation occurs when 
the message is either incorrect, incomplete, inconsistent with other messages in 
the same program, or contradictory. This element of "misinformation" can negate 
the effectiveness of the message and an entire communication program. Some 
examples are cited which show that in programs aimed at effecting change in 
attitude or behavior it is essential to ensure that messages are clearly 
communicated to avoid misunderstanding and the right infrastructure is in place 
for the innovation proposed by the message to be carried out. In the Jamaica 
Nutrition Education Program (JNEP) were used to communicate the messages. 
Evaluation revealed that health staff were providing incorrect and contradictory 
advice about breastfeeding, which showed that they lacked basic information on 
the subject. In Barbados, despite an intensified health education campaign, face 
to face instruction in the clinics, and extensive use of the Caribbean Food and 
Nutrition Institute (CFNI) Breastfeeding Package as well as other locally 
developed materials, a marked decline in breastfeeding was recorded over the 
1969-81 survey period. Misinformation and misunderstanding among mothers were 
identified as the key reasons for the failure of breastfeeding. In relation to 
the decline in breaastfeeding and incorrect weaning practices, mass media was 
implicated as luring mothers away from natural feeding methods towards the use 
of expensive imported products. A 1976 CFNI meeting established strong linkages 
between mass media and nutrition personnel and was the factor most responsible 
for the selection of an advertising/marketing approach as the chief component of 
the mass media strategy. In sum, there is more to communication than mere 
information transfer. Effective communication can produce/create the right 
climate for change to occur. The nature of the message is an important 
determining factor in attitude and behavior change, and the message must fit the 
intended audience. The medium of the message must be appropriate, culturally 
relevant, familiar and liked.

PMID: 12312963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Int J Biometeorol. 1991 Nov;35(3):139-50. doi: 10.1007/BF01049060.

Selected questions of topical interest in human bioclimatology.

Jendritzky G(1).

Author information:
(1)Deutscher Wetterdienst, Zentrale Medizin-Meteorologische Forschungsstelle, 
Frieburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

This paper deals with the different effects of climate, and the likely impact of 
climatic change, on the human being, his health and well-being. Those effects 
follow from consideration of the human energy budget and air pollution, 
including photooxidants and radiation, the latter especially in the UV-range. 
The development of tools to produce bioclimate maps, i.e. maps expressed in 
physiologically significant terms, in different scales up to the high resolution 
necessary for the microscale urban climate, will be discussed. The most 
important questions in bioclimate research and its application will be 
considered.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01049060
PMID: 1778644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Adv Nurs. 1994 Feb;19(2):367-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2648.1994.tb01094.x.

Confronting patriarchal attitudes in the fight for professional recognition.

Carter H(1).

Author information:
(1)Young Disabled Unit, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, England.

Contemporary nursing practice and education belong to a dynamic process which is 
likely to change the structure of nursing, as well as the relationships that 
have been established with other professions. This paper is concerned with the 
professionalization of nursing and examines how nurses and doctors maintain, or 
challenge, patriarchal relationships in a clinical context. It also examines the 
wider social climate which upholds the subordination of women in the caring 
environment. The implementation of alternative therapies, emphasis on patient 
education, rehabilitation and individualized care all contribute to a climate in 
which nurses are able to develop an area that can be deemed as their own. 
Furthermore, the achievement of research-based practice, and the implementation 
of primary nursing in many areas, indicate a collective approach to patient 
care. By linking these developments with a feminist discourse nurses are able to 
challenge their position within the sexual division of labour and highlight the 
ambiguous position they occupy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2648.1994.tb01094.x
PMID: 8188970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Manag Med. 1994;8(4):28-37. doi: 10.1108/02689239410068534.

Coping with change in public health medicine in the 1990s.

Pitman M(1), Hamlin M.

Author information:
(1)South and West Regional Health Authority.

Investigates the effect of change, both structural and in process, in the NHS 
with regard to the capacity of public health doctors and dentists in the South 
Western Regional Health Authority to cope with the inherent stresses. 
Sixty-three public health doctors and dentists were asked to fill in a 
questionnaire. Satisfaction was expressed most with factors intrinsic to the job 
(41%) followed by the role in the organization (24%), relationships at work 
(21%), career development (8%), and organizational structure and climate (6%). 
Dissatisfaction was identified with factors related to organizational structure 
and climate (32%), factors intrinsic to the job (30%), the role in the 
organization (18%), career development (14%) and relationships at work (6%). 
Overall there was much more dissatisfaction than satisfaction with 
organizational structure and climate and career development than with the other 
factors. Improvements suggested included more support staff and improved 
training. Joint problem solving sessions with managers to identify what is 
required to co-ordinate the work of both, and the use of time management 
techniques might be helpful.

DOI: 10.1108/02689239410068534
PMID: 10138784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. A Global Decline in Microbiological Safety of Water: A Call for Action: The 
colloquium, entitled ‚ÄúGlobal Issues in Microbiological Water Quality for the 
Next Century,‚Äù held April 4‚Äì6, 1995 in Guayaquil, Ecuador.

Washington (DC): American Society for Microbiology; 1996.
American Academy of Microbiology Colloquia Reports.

Increases in population over the past century have placed tremendous pressures 
on water resources of both the developed and developing world. These pressures 
include direct contamination from domestic, industrial, and agricultural wastes 
and less direct effects caused by climate change and other ecological 
disturbances. The result is a contaminated and often increasingly scarce global 
resource, which in turn is contributing to a rise in waterborne disease 
outbreaks worldwide. Population projections for the next century suggest that 
these pressures can only increase. Without appropriate intervention, waterborne 
disease outbreaks/epidemics/pandemics are also expected to increase 
dramatically. Waterborne disease cannot be eradicated, as was smallpox, because 
of the variety of disease agents transmitted by water. Trade and travel are too 
extensive; border closures have not proved effective. On the contrary, they are 
more often destructive to both the economy and the culture of a region. Risks of 
disease must, therefore, be controlled at the community level by basic 
sanitation and availability of uncontaminated water. A systems approach is 
needed for water management, including watershed protection, drinking water 
treatment and distribution, and wastewater collection and treatment. Control of 
waterborne disease is dependent on education at every level‚Äîfrom household to 
government. Solutions to the problem of waterborne disease vary, depending on 
regional economy and climate. For developing countries, a low technology 
approach‚Äîi.e., education and minimal treatment‚Äîmay dramatically reduce incidence 
of waterborne disease, which, as an immediate consequence, will significantly 
effect the economy of that region. Industrial productivity, including tourism, 
depends on a disease-free environment. To induce governments to invest in water 
quality improvements, emphasis needs to be placed on economic benefits. 
Developed countries face the very real demands of existing infrastructures, 
emergence of pathogens resistant to water treatment and disinfection, and 
increasing numbers of immuno-compromised individuals. In addition, poorly 
defined risks from toxicity of disinfection byproducts need to be considered. 
Clearly, education is critical, from the level of the average citizen to water 
utility personnel, professional organizations, and universities conducting 
research. One area of notable concern involves use of indicator organisms. 
Dependence on traditional indicators, such as coliforms, can be misleading, 
particularly when viral and/or protozoal contamination is suspected. There is a 
critical need for the immediate future to identify more appropriate indicators 
for both temperate and tropical regions and/or to validate/modify the use of 
current indicators. In the long run, however, direct detection and enumeration 
of pathogens must be accomplished. In summary, the quality of global water 
supplies cannot continue to deteriorate without serious consequences to global 
distribution, incidence, and severity of waterborne disease. Accurate risk 
analysis and global public education at all levels are critical. Although 
application of advanced technologies can improve water quality, massive 
investment is required. Low technology options, coupled with appropriate 
education, can provide dramatic improvements in human health in even the least 
developed countries. Ideally, a multidisciplinary approach would be undertaken 
internationally, with both developed and developing nations working in unison to 
address water quality issues. Sanitary engineers, microbiologists, 
epidemiologists, and public health officials working as a team to address the 
health risks posed by microbial pathogens should be the highest priority, 
nationally and internationally.

Copyright 1996 American Academy of Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAMCol.4Apr.1995
PMID: 32809303


125. J Paediatr Child Health. 1999 Jun;35(3):296-9. doi: 
10.1046/j.1440-1754.1999.00362.x.

Why do mothers still sun their infants?

Harrison SL(1), Buettner PG, MacLennan R.

Author information:
(1)Skin Cancer Research Group, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, 
James Cook University, Townsville, Queensland, Australia. 
simone.harrison@jcu.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of maternal beliefs about the therapeutic 
uses of sunlight in infancy in tropical Australia.
METHODOLOGY: Data were collected by interviewing 114 post-partum patients in 
Townsville (19 degrees 16'S), Queensland. Each woman was asked a series of 
open-ended and set-response questions about ancestry, pigmentation, residential 
history, parity, maternal and paternal education, and beliefs regarding the 
reputed therapeutic uses of sunlight.
RESULTS: Half of the women had at least one risky belief about the perceived 
benefits of sunning their baby. Thirty-six per cent were in favour of using 
sunlight to treat neonatal jaundice; 20.2% believed it was necessary to 
intentionally sun their baby to prevent vitamin D deficiency; and 10.5% thought 
sunlight was a good remedy for nappy rash. Independent predictors of one or more 
of these beliefs included maternal age and education level, and having another 
child that had been treated for jaundice. Forty per cent of multiparous women 
had sunned a child to treat neonatal jaundice. In most cases, advice to mothers 
to sun their baby had been given by a midwife/nurse (41% or a 
doctor/paediatrician (28%).
CONCLUSIONS: Post-parturient women had a high prevalence of beliefs that may 
result in their infant being intentionally exposed to sunlight, and which could 
increase their child's future risk of skin neoplasia. Midwives and doctors, 
including paediatricians, were identified as the major professional sources of 
these beliefs. Professional education is needed to change the beliefs of health 
professionals who recommend therapies involving sunlight.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1754.1999.00362.x
PMID: 10404454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Lancet. 1991 Jun 8;337(8754):1393-7. doi: 10.1016/0140-6736(91)93069-l.

Seasonality of disease in Kuwait.

Douglas AS(1), al-Sayer H, Rawles JM, Allan TM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Aberdeen, UK.

To compare the seasonal variation in total mortality and deaths from 
cardiovascular, respiratory, and malignant disease, data were collected from 
North-East Scotland (Grampian region) and Kuwait. Seasonal differences were 
similar, in both timing and degree, for total mortality and deaths from 
circulatory disease, but were greater in Kuwait for respiratory disease. Peak 
mortality was during winter in both areas: in Grampian, when the climate is most 
uncomfortable, and in Kuwait, when the climate is at its most comfortable. 
Socioeconomic changes in Kuwait have been accompanied by a rapid fall in the 
degree of seasonality (deseasonality) for both total and infant mortality. These 
findings suggest that mortality peaks in winter, not because of a seasonally low 
temperature, but because of a seasonal fall in mean temperature irrespective of 
the annual mean temperature.

PIP: Seasonality of total mortality in Kuwait and causes of death from 
cardiovascular, respiratory, malignancy, injuries and poisoning, and all other 
diseases was analyzed by the cosinor method, and compared to data from Grampian, 
East Scotland as an example of an industrialized area. Data for Kuwait were 
taken from Ministries of Public Health and of Planning. For cosinor analysis, 
the mean mortality from each cause was computed, and the percent change for each 
month is called amplitude. For Kuwait the total mortality peaks in winter, with 
a declining amplitude, from 20% in the mid-1970s, to about 10% in the mid 1980s. 
Improved public health typically causes this reduction in seasonal amplitude, 
called deseasonality. Kuwait's seasonal deaths are largely due to 40% 
seasonality in cardiovascular deaths. Deaths due to malignancy, injuries and 
poisonings, and all other deaths are not seasonal. In comparison, in Grampian, 
60% of total mortality is cardiovascular and is seasonal, and injuries and all 
other diseases are also seasonal, while malignancies are not seasonal. The 
phasing of seasonal cardiovascular deaths is similar in both locations, with 
similar peaks of about 20% in January. For both areas the timing of respiratory 
deaths peaks in February, but the amplitude is 46% for Kuwait compared to 33% 
for Grampian. Kuwait also had significant winter peaks for infectious and 
parasitic diseases, congenital anomalies and perinatal deaths, accounting for 
27% of all deaths, while these causes made up only 2% of deaths in Scotland. 
Kuwait has a relatively higher proportion of infant deaths, 24.7%, with 
seasonality, while Grampian has more deaths of elderly 75, 48%, also seasonal. 
Both locations are in the northern hemisphere, with lowest temperatures in the 
winter. Grampian's July mean temperatures, however are similar to Kuwait's 
January mean. Grampian also differs from Kuwait in a much wider variation in 
photoperiodicity, or day length. The reasons why mortality peaks in warm 
climates in pleasant winter conditions is not known.

DOI: 10.1016/0140-6736(91)93069-l
PMID: 1674772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Health Prog. 1988 Sep;69(7):30-41.

Rural healthcare in transition. A time for change management.

Hart JP.

The fundamental challenge for rural healthcare leaders today is to address three 
key questions: What is the nature of the system that is undergoing change? What 
are the nature and extent of the changes? What strategies are needed to manage 
in a climate of change? Healthcare administrators' perspective of rural 
healthcare systems must take into account the full range of provider 
organizations, promote the idea of continuum of care, and consider system and 
environment as mutually dependent parts of a larger whole. The environments that 
have influenced rural healthcare delivery and organization in the 1980s include 
demographics, epidemiology, economics, finances, personnel, technology, 
regulations, and politics. As hospital admissions and patient days declined 
under the pressures of cost containment, population shifts, and changes in 
medical practice, rural hospitals sought to maintain viability through a variety 
of adaptive actions, such as downsizing, forming relationships with other 
hospitals, and diversifying. These environmental and restructuring trends will 
require some degree of adaptation by rural healthcare organizations. Leaders 
will have to shift the organization toward a horizontal orientation, which 
emphasizes participation by department heads and supervisors in defining and 
implementing interorganizational relationships; authority for horizontal action 
taking and seeking out additional connections that will improve continuity and 
quality of care; and team-building skills to enhance cooperation and 
effectiveness.

PMID: 10288935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Cardiopulm Rehabil. 1998 Mar-Apr;18(2):113-23. doi: 
10.1097/00008483-199803000-00004.

A new model for risk stratification and delivery of cardiovascular 
rehabilitation services in the long-term clinical management of patients with 
coronary artery disease.

Roitman JL(1), LaFontaine T, Drimmer AM.

Author information:
(1)Research Medical Center, Kansas City, Missouri 64132-1199, USA.

Comment in
    J Cardiopulm Rehabil. 1998 Jul-Aug;18(4):313-4.

This model for risk stratification includes variables that classify patients for 
Risk of Event similar to current models of risk stratification, as well as 
variables that stratify patients for Risk of Progression of Atherosclerosis by 
established risk factors. Categories of risk are established using accepted data 
from the literature for each risk factor that targets regression or plaque 
stabilization as the goal for Low Risk. A case-rate charging system and the 
proposed removal of time restrictions for length of cardiovascular 
rehabilitation fit neatly into the present climate for health care. Health 
maintenance organizations will be seeking programs that use similar models to 
address cost issues inherent in cardiovascular rehabilitation programs under 
current fee-for-service models. Improved outcomes will also be targets for these 
programs and case-management lends itself to disease management, thus, improved 
outcomes. Tracking outcomes becomes even more important to both the provider and 
the insurer because results drive referrals. Likewise, removal of the time 
restriction for cardiovascular rehabilitation allows programs to individualize 
care and to target risk factors that are not only most deleterious, but also 
where patients show readiness for change. The changing environment of health 
care virtually mandates change in cardiovascular rehabilitation. It is 
imperative that programs manage the disease process, are effective in achieving 
outcomes that affect both patient function and the disease process, and are cost 
effective. This model for risk stratification and delivery of services addresses 
these requirements and provides a beginning for implementing these changes in 
cardiovascular rehabilitation.

DOI: 10.1097/00008483-199803000-00004
PMID: 9559448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Environ Health Perspect. 1979 Dec;33:273-83. doi: 10.1289/ehp.7933273.

Atmospheric CO2 consequences of heavy dependence on coal.

Rotty RM.

Accurate and regular measurements of the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere 
during the past 20 years show an accelerating increase. Although clearing of 
tropical forests has released large amounts of carbon to the atmosphere, 
evidence is strong that a major contributor is the combustion of fossil fuels. 
Future energy demands of the world will require extensive further exploitation 
of fossil fuels, and projections show that without major development of 
nonfossil fuel alternatives, the atmospheric concentration will double within 
the next 75 years. Four issues require serious attention. The developing 
countries will require vastly increased amounts of energy. Major efforts to 
develop suitable (inexpensive) nonfossil energy sources to meet at least a 
portion of this demand are required. The distribution of carbon released from 
fossil fuels and from other anthropogenic sources among the reservoirs of the 
carbon cycle must be better defined. Uncertainties regarding the effect of the 
increased concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere on global climate must be 
reduced. Possible political and social responses to a substantial climate change 
must be studied in order to more fully understand all of the implication of 
increased atmospheric CO2.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.7933273
PMCID: PMC1638116
PMID: 120253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Science. 2000 Sep 8;289(5485):1763-6.

The global spread of malaria in a future, warmer world.

Rogers DJ(1), Randolph SE.

Author information:
(1)Trypanosomiasis and Land-use in Africa Research Group, Oxford Tick Research 
Group, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 
3PS, UK. david.rogers@zoology.ox.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Science 2000 Sep 29;289(5499):2284.

Comment in
    Science. 2000 Sep 8;289(5485):1697-8.

The frequent warnings that global climate change will allow falciparum malaria 
to spread into northern latitudes, including Europe and large parts of the 
United States, are based on biological transmission models driven principally by 
temperature. These models were assessed for their value in predicting present, 
and therefore future, malaria distribution. In an alternative statistical 
approach, the recorded present-day global distribution of falciparum malaria was 
used to establish the current multivariate climatic constraints. These results 
were applied to future climate scenarios to predict future distributions, which 
showed remarkably few changes, even under the most extreme scenarios.

PMID: 10976072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Image J Nurs Sch. 1998;30(4):345-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1547-5069.1998.tb01331.x.

Hospital nurses' perceptions of the ethical climate of their work setting.

Olson LL(1).

Author information:
(1)Saint Xavier University, Chicago, Illinois 60655, USA. olson@sxu.edu

PURPOSE: To develop an instrument to measure how hospital nurses perceive the 
ethical climate of their work setting and to evaluate its psychometric 
properties. A way to measure ethical climate can help nurses understand the work 
setting influences on their practice and can be used to diagnose areas for 
organizational change as well as to evaluate effectiveness of organizational 
interventions.
DESIGN: Descriptive. Instrument developed was the Hospital Ethical Climate 
Survey (HECS). Sampled were 360 RNs (48% response rate) employed in clinical 
practice at two acute-care hospitals in one U.S. midwestern city. The nurses 
completed a questionnaire in 1993-1994 consisting of items developed to assess 
their perceptions of ethical climate, along with the 43-item Integrity Audit, a 
social desirability scale, and a demographic inventory.
METHODS: Construct validity was assessed by confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) 
using the LISREL 7 statistical program.
RESULTS: The final CFA model consisted of 26 variables in five factors, which 
were organized according to the relationships of nurses with peers, patients, 
managers, hospital, and physicians. Internal consistency reliability, using 
Cronbach's alpha, for the final 26-item instrument was 0.91 (range 0.68 to 0.92) 
for the subscales.
CONCLUSIONS: The Hospital Ethical Climate Survey has acceptable initial 
reliability and validity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1547-5069.1998.tb01331.x
PMID: 9866295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Health Soc Policy. 1992;3(3):69-83. doi: 10.1300/J045v03n03_05.

The politics of prevention: changing definitions of substance use/abuse.

Goldstein MB(1), Engwall DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Central Connecticut State University, New Britain 
06050.

Over the past decade there has been a significant shift in the language used by 
the Reagan and Bush administrations in the fight against youthful drug abuse. We 
believe this shift reflects a change both in the "moral climate" regarding drug 
use as well as a reconceptualization of the appropriate way to confront the 
issue--the "just say no" philosophy. This paper will first provide a brief 
sociological overview of the emergence of adolescent drug use as a major social 
problem. We will then document, through an examination of government-sponsored 
literature on drug use produced over the past 10 years, the changes in 
conceptual focus that have occurred and consider some of the potential negative 
consequences of these changes for education.

DOI: 10.1300/J045v03n03_05
PMID: 10170971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Jul;108(7):A316-9. doi: 10.1289/ehp.108-a316.

Trusting in a better future: the global environment facility.

Holton WC.

Individual countries acting alone cannot solve environmental problems that span 
national borders. The Global Environment Facility (GEF) was created in 1991 to 
serve as a mechanism for international cooperation in the funding of grants to 
address concerns in four areas of the global environment: biological diversity, 
climate change, international waters, and ozone layer depletion. To date, more 
than 500 projects have been funded with over $2 billion of GEF funds and another 
$5 billion leveraged from public and private sources, including $2 billion in 
matching funds from developing countries.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.108-a316
PMCID: PMC1638197
PMID: 10903626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Soc Sci Med. 1994 Jul;39(2):247-54. doi: 10.1016/0277-9536(94)90333-6.

A model for community involvement in health (CIH) program development.

Hildebrandt E(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Illinois College of Nursing, Rock Island 61265.

Community involvement in health (CIH), a central concept in health development, 
is a participatory approach to health care that is organized from the 
perspective of the recipient. Putting CIH into practice represents a learning 
experience for the community, the health professionals involved and those 
responsible for the national climate in which this change takes place. The CIH 
process was operationalized over a two-year period in a black township in South 
Africa. A community survey identified the health needs and capacities related to 
the elderly, their families and their support system. Community groups and 
individuals, in partnership with the researcher, prioritized the needs that had 
been identified and then implemented four programs related to those needs. A 
process model was developed that provided the structure for initiating and 
maintaining these programs. The model helped people who were new to the 
community organizing to focus on general principles. It was flexible so that 
programs could be interpreted and implemented in the context of local culture 
and resources. The model was functional in guiding community nurses, lay 
community members and employees in health-related programs through the process 
of starting new programs. This approach empowered participants to move beyond 
only hoping for change or being puzzled by its elusiveness.

DOI: 10.1016/0277-9536(94)90333-6
PMID: 8066503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Lancet. 1992 May 30;339(8805):1330-3. doi: 10.1016/0140-6736(92)91967-d.

What are the forests worth?

Fellows L(1).

Author information:
(1)Royal Botanic Gardens, Surrey, UK.

PIP: The Earth is a finite environment, thus growth cannot occur indefinitely. 
Eventually we will run out of space, resources, or anything else that is also 
finite. Once this fact is recognized, it becomes clear that we must develop in a 
sustainable way so that we can endure into the future. Overpopulation, 
vegetation destruction, and pollution are all serious threats to our finite 
environment. Traditionally, change has been to expensive and politically 
destabilizing. However, extensive changes in our modes of living must be made so 
that they become sustainable. In both developed and developing countries, 
consumptive growth must be replaced with sustainable development. Many 
developing countries are currently selling their natural resources to the 
developed countries. When they run out of resources, they will be truly poor. 
All governments must recognize the value of forests. It is estimated that in 
terms of medical uses for forest products alone, they will be worth US$11-12 
billion (1990 dollars) by 2050. This constitutes a large portion of developing 
countries economies. Also, 80% of the population of developing countries rely on 
natural, traditional medicines made from forest products. Even in the US 25% of 
prescription drugs are based on phytochemicals. Now the drug companies are 
actively pursuing these resources for their products. It is estimated that 95% 
of the world species have not been assayed for their chemical value. Technology 
and money are not the obstacles to sustainable development and forest 
conservation. It is will and attitude that must be radically changed in order to 
protect the forests for the ecological and economic value.

DOI: 10.1016/0140-6736(92)91967-d
PMID: 1349998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Nurs Adm. 1985 Jul-Aug;15(7-8):9-17.

Why health-care teams don't change: chronicity and collusion.

Goren S, Ottaway R.

Organizational chronicity exists in many health-care settings. This syndrome 
organizes the agency's approach to problems, dampens enthusiasm about the 
possibility of change, and fosters a climate in which change behaviors are 
undermined and sabotaged. The authors identify collusion, characteristics of the 
health-care team, errors of the internal training staff, and consultant errors 
as four significant contributors to organizational chronicity, and offer 
strategies for changing settings in which chronicity is the norm.

PMID: 3848469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Public Health Rev. 1990-1991;18(1):49-67; discussion 69-72.

Implications for human health of global ecological changes.

Last J(1), Guidotti TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Community Medicine, University of Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.

Comparatively little attention has been given to the health implications of 
global ecological changes on human health, with the exception of concern over 
ozone depletion leading to an increased frequency of ultraviolet 
irradiation-induced skin cancer and cataracts. The implications for human health 
of five large-scale ecological disruptions were explored: climate change 
(greenhouse effect), ozone depletion, acid precipitation, transregional 
pollution, and demographic changes. Limitations of presently available data and 
the uncertainty of current interpretations of apparent trend is emphasized. 
Rigorous assessment of the effects of these changes and the response required 
from public health professionals is needed. This overview provides a point of 
departure.

PMID: 2132883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Int J Addict. 1994 Feb;29(3):303-23. doi: 10.3109/10826089409047383.

Drug and alcohol use in the former Soviet Union: selected factors and future 
considerations.

Davis RB(1).

Author information:
(1)U.S. Army Foreign Science and Technology Center, Charlottesville, Virginia.

As new nations form out of the wreckage of the Soviet Empire, they will be 
encumbered by the persistent political, economic, and social problems that have 
plagued this region for centuries. Today, the leaders of the emerging central 
Eurasian area are focused solely on political and economic concerns. They are 
paying little attention to the drug use that, like the more traditional heavy 
alcohol use, is a means by which many people of this region escape the reality 
and manifold uncertainties of today's world. If and when the political and 
economic climate of the central Eurasian area stabilizes, regional leaders will 
face an addiction problem that will have, by then, become the region's greatest 
obstacle to social progress and sound public health.

DOI: 10.3109/10826089409047383
PMID: 8188430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Lancet. 1990 Feb 17;335(8686):387-90. doi: 10.1016/0140-6736(90)90216-r.

Tuberculosis and human immunodeficiency virus infection in developing countries.

Harries AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet. 1990 Apr 28;335(8696):1044.

PIP: Estimates show that 5 million people worldwide are infected with human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Recent estimates are that 8-10 million new 
tuberculosis (TB) cases occur each year in the world. 2-3 million die. In 
developing countries, TB is one of the most common opportunistic infections in 
people who are seropositive for HIV-1. About 90% of the TB is pulmonary. Of 
those without pulmonary tuberculosis, 85% had lymphadenopathy, bone and joint 
disease, or pleural effusion. In adults and children over 15 who had pulmonary 
TB, 78% had positive sputum smears for acid-fast bacilli. 66% had cavitation on 
chest radiography. Many people with TB and HIV infection have typical clinical 
and radiologic features. However, African clinicians have seen a change. This 
makes TB harder to diagnose. In Bangui, Central African Republic, 30% of 
pulmonary TB patients were HIV seropositive. Studies from Zaire and Zambia also 
had patients with suspected TB and extrapulmonary TB with higher HIV 
seropositivity rates than those with sputum-positive TB. Haitians show a similar 
disease pattern to that of Africa. 70% of people with tuberculosis and the 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) had extrapulmonary disease compared 
with 20% of the HIV-negative people with TB. Chemotherapy of TB in Africans who 
also have HIV infection is not certain. Clinical impressions suggest that the 
disease responds well to the usual therapy. However, a Central African study 
found that mortality 12 months after the start of the usual drug therapy was 
32.5% in HIV-seropositives compared with 1.5% in HIV-seronegatives. Several 
countries in Africa use short-course drug therapy for smear-positive pulmonary 
TB. They use the usual regime for smear-negative and extrapulmonary TB. Since 
AIDS, there are more skin allergic reactions to the usual drug therapy. There 
are more severe reactions now. Thiacetazone is the drug which probably causes 
this reaction. BCG immunization is used to control TB in Africa. World Health 
Organization guidelines are to withhold BCG from HIV- seropositive people with 
symptoms. What about infants born to HIV- seropositive mothers?

DOI: 10.1016/0140-6736(90)90216-r
PMID: 1968123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Pediatrics. 1994 Jun;93(6 Pt 2):1073-7.

Using mass media to reduce adolescent involvement in drug trafficking.

Romer D(1).

Author information:
(1)Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

OBJECTIVE: Drug trafficking among adolescents is a newly recognized high-risk 
behavior that seems to be involving large numbers of youths. Strategies to 
prevent and/or alter this behavior must be developed and evaluated. In view of 
the high exposure of adolescents to the mass media, interventionists seeking to 
reduce adolescent risk behavior have increasingly employed the media in their 
efforts to reduce adolescent risk behaviors in general. However, not all risk 
behaviors may be amendable to change as a result of this approach. Therefore, 
before utilizing this approach to address adolescent drug trafficking, it is 
important to investigate previous efforts targeting related risk behaviors.
RESULTS: Mass media campaigns against the use of drugs have been common in the 
US and seem to have played a role in reducing consumption of both legal and 
illegal drugs. The most effective messages seem to focus on the risks of drug 
use and the social disapproval that attends use. The mass media may increase the 
influence of these antidrug messages by changing the social climate surrounding 
drug use.
CONCLUSIONS: The mass media may be a particularly effective way to reach 
adolescents and their parents in communities in which adolescent drug 
trafficking is prevalent and to unite the institutions that could influence 
adolescents against involvement in the drug trade. However, intervention efforts 
must also contend with the economic incentives of the drug trade in poor, 
central-city communities.

PMID: 8197010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Environ Health Perspect. 1999 Feb;107(2):99-102. doi: 10.1289/ehp.9910799.

El Ni√±o and the dynamics of vectorborne disease transmission.

Hales S(1), Weinstein P, Souares Y, Woodward A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Wellington School of Medicine, Wellington, New 
Zealand.

The objective of the study was to investigate the relationship between reported 
incidence of dengue fever and El Ni√±o southern oscillation (ENSO) in 14 island 
nations of the South Pacific. Using a mixed ecological study design, we 
calculated correlations between annual averages of the southern oscillation 
index (SOI), local temperature and rainfall, and dengue fever. We also 
calculated temporal correlations between monthly reports of dengue fever cases 
on different islands. There were positive correlations between SOI and dengue in 
10 countries. In five of these (including all of the larger islands) there were 
also positive correlations between SOI and estimates of local temperature and/or 
rainfall. There were temporal correlations between monthly reports of dengue 
cases within two groups of countries. Climate changes associated with ENSO may 
trigger an increase in dengue fever transmission in larger, more populated 
islands where the disease is endemic. There was also evidence of propagation of 
infection from larger islands to smaller neighbors. Unlike the initiation of 
epidemics, this transfer between islands appears to be independent of 
interannual climate variations, pointing to the importance of modulating factors 
in dengue transmission such as population density and travel. In the future, 
models of the impact of climate change must attempt to account for these 
factors.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.9910799
PMCID: PMC1566321
PMID: 9924003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand Suppl. 1997;111:113-5.

Principles of operating room organization.

Watkins WD(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Trials Program, Anesthesiology/CCM, University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center, USA.

The importance of the changing health care climate has triggered important 
changes in the management of high-cost components of acute care facilities. By 
integrating and better managing various elements of the surgical process, health 
care institutions are able to rationally trim costs while maintaining 
high-quality services. The leadership that physicians can provide is crucial to 
the success of this undertaking (1). The importance of the use of primary data 
related to patient throughput and related resources should be strongly 
emphasized, for only when such data are converted to INFORMATION of functional 
value can participating healthcare personnel be reasonably expected to 
anticipate and respond to varying clinical demands with ever-limited resources. 
Despite the claims of specific commercial vendors, no single product will likely 
be sufficient to significantly change the perioperative process to the degree or 
for the duration demanded by healthcare reform. The most effective approach to 
achieving safety, cost-effectiveness, and predictable process in the realm of 
Surgical Services will occur by appropriate application of the "best of breed" 
contributions of: (a) medical/patient safety practice/oversight; (b) information 
technology; (c) contemporary management; and (d) innovative and functional 
cost-accounting methodology. S "modified activity-based cost accounting method" 
can serve as the basis for acquiring true direct-cost information related to the 
perioperative process. The proposed overall management strategy emphasizes 
process and feedback, rather than specific product, and although imposing 
initial demands and change on the traditional hospital setting, can advance the 
strongest competitive position in perioperative services. This comprehensive 
approach comprises a functional basis for important bench-marking activities 
among multiple surgical services. An active, comparative process of this type is 
of paramount importance in emphasizing patient care and safety as the highest 
priority while changing the process and cost of perioperative care. 
Additionally, this approach objectively defines the surgical process in terms by 
which the impact of new treatments, drugs, devices and process changes can be 
assessed rationally.

PMID: 9420979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Hosp Health Serv Adm. 1997 Fall;42(3):339-65.

Organizational culture: the critical link between strategy and results.

Vestal KW(1), Fralicx RD, Spreier SW.

Author information:
(1)Hay Group, Dallas, TX 75243, USA.

The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is undertaking a massive 
reorganization to transform itself into a more efficient, patient-focused 
healthcare system. It has developed a new strategy and structure. But if it is 
to achieve the rapid, sustainable transformation needed to succeed in today's 
environment, it must also change its culture. The rigid, functionally focused, 
command-and-control culture that has long been a hallmark of VA must be replaced 
by one that values speed, flexibility, and the processes for delivering 
high-quality, cost-effective patient care. Such a change will not come easily. 
In addition to the normal hurdles, several barriers are unique to VA. They 
include ingrained bureaucratic traditions and behaviors, constraints imposed by 
the federal government, close scrutiny by powerful service organizations, and a 
Civil Service employee base that makes the hiring, promoting, and removing of 
employees a slow, unwieldy, and procedurally complex exercise. In a climate that 
does not encourage change, successful transformation must be well orchestrated. 
To drive the change, the leadership must be mobilized as a team, new work 
processes must be developed, and a full range of human resource processes must 
be established.

PMID: 10169292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. The Pervasive Role of Science, Technology, and Health in Foreign Policy: 
Imperatives for the Department of State.

National Research Council (US) Committee on Science, Technology, and Health 
Aspects of the Foreign Policy Agenda of the United States.

Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 1999.

Issues involving science, technology, and health (STH) have moved to the 
forefront of the international diplomatic agenda. Other vital issues linked to 
technological developments pervade longer-range foreign policy concerns. Thus, 
STH considerations are often central to the Department of State‚Äôs bilateral and 
multilateral interactions with other governments. STH aspects play a large role 
in discussions of such critical topics as nuclear nonproliferation, use of outer 
space, population growth, adequate and safe food supply, climate change, 
infectious diseases, energy resources, and competitiveness of industrial 
technologies. In addressing these issues, expert STH knowledge is essential to 
the anticipation and resolution of problems and to the achievement of foreign 
policy goals. The Department, recognizing that it requires strengthened 
capabilities to address such an array of topics, asked for suggestions by the 
National Research Council as to how it could better deal with foreign policy 
issues with STH content.

Copyright 1999 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.17226/9688
PMID: 25077236


145. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2000 May-Jun;94(3):253-5. doi: 
10.1016/s0035-9203(00)90310-9.

Changing patterns of clinical malaria since 1965 among a tea estate population 
located in the Kenyan highlands.

Shanks GD(1), Biomndo K, Hay SI, Snow RW.

Author information:
(1)US Army Medical Research Unit-Kenya. shanksdg@thai.amedd.army.mil

The changing epidemiology of clinical malaria since 1965 among hospitalized 
patients was studied at a group of tea estates in the western highlands of 
Kenya. These data indicate recent dramatic increases in the numbers of malaria 
admissions (6.5 to 32.5% of all admissions), case fatality (1.3 to 6%) and 
patients originating from low-risk, highland areas (34 to 59%). Climate change, 
environmental management, population migration, and breakdown in health service 
provision seem unlikely explanations for this changing disease pattern. The 
coincident arrival of chloroquine resistance during the late 1980s in the 
subregion suggests that drug resistance is a key factor in the current pattern 
and burden of malaria among this highland population.

DOI: 10.1016/s0035-9203(00)90310-9
PMCID: PMC3272391
PMID: 10974991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Med Genet. 1997 Jul 11;71(1):22-8. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19970711)71:1<22::aid-ajmg4>3.0.co;2-s.

Developmental tasks of childhood and adolescence: implications for genetic 
testing.

Fanos JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Many reports have recently recommended a careful weighing of the potential 
benefits and harms of genetic testing (carrier or predisposition) of children 
and adolescents [Andrews et al., Washington DC: National Academy Press, 1994; 
Wertz et al., JAMA, 272:875-881, 1994; Clinical Genetics Society (UK), J Med 
Genet, 31:785-797, 1994; ASHJ/ACMG, Am J Hum Genet, 57:1233-1241, 1995]. Despite 
this, youngsters are currently being tested for late-onset disorders as well as 
for carrier status [Reilly and Wertz, Am J Hum Genet, 57:A57, 1995]. Many 
children to be tested will be those in at-risk families, who may already have 
experienced the chronic illness or death of a close relative. Thus, reactions to 
testing will be influenced by prior family experiences. Emotional reactions to 
testing will be determined by both the child's cognitive and psychosocial 
development. Testing of adolescents may alter the achievement of developmental 
tasks, including seeking freedom from parental figures, establishment of 
personal identity, handling of sexual energies, and remodeling of former 
idealizations of self and others. There are many potential dilemmas in deciding 
whether to test a child or adolescent for genetic status. If parents choose not 
to test, the risk is for later difficulty integrating such information into the 
self concept. If parents test and do not tell results, the risk is for creating 
a climate of family secrecy. If parents test and tell results, the risk is 
robbing the child of the autonomy of his or her own later decision. Perhaps the 
question of whether to test is not the real question. More than genetic testing, 
genetic counseling is of crucial importance in thoughtful decisions concerning 
whether to test an individual child or adolescent. A more important question may 
be how to provide unaffected children in at-risk families with appropriate 
counseling. Provision of psychosocial support to at-risk families will enable 
the child to encounter genetic testing, if necessary, supported with the best 
possible resources.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19970711)71:1<22::aid-ajmg4>3.0.co;2-s
PMID: 9215763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nutr Health. 1986;4(2):71-82. doi: 10.1177/026010608600400203.

The political economy of famine.

Hay RW.

This paper explores some of the reasons why the well-laid plans of the 1970's 
failed to be an effective bulwark against hunger. It is reflective rather than 
critical because we are faced with the certainty that just as surely as the 
famines of the 1980's followed the famines of the 1970's, the 1990's will again 
see drought, crop failure and, unless things change a great deal, famine as 
well. The analysis of the causes of hunger current in the 1970's can be 
summarized somewhat brutally as follows. Either there is not enough to eat, or 
what is available is poor in nutritional quality. Poor nutrition is synergistic 
with disease. Together they result in increasing debility and finally death. 
Famine is an unusual event, precipitated by this same triad of factors, on a 
catastrophic scale. The strategies which emerged from this analysis can be 
placed similarly under three broad headings. The first is that food production 
must be increased so that there is more available for everyone. The second is 
that national food security strategies should be developed and implemented. The 
third is that nutritional quality of people's diets should be improved. These 
are three major goals which have dominated international thinking for a decade. 
This paper argues that this analysis is at the very least incomplete and that 
the strategies based upon it have failed to make a marked impact on the risk 
vulnerable households face to famine. It goes on to suggest that, irrespective 
of the quantity and quality of food generally available, the households, poorer 
communities and poorer countries are able to lay claim to a share of what is 
available. These claims are mediated by a hierarchy of relationships--households 
within communities, communities within countries and countries in the world at 
large--and the nature of the relationships constitutes the 'political economy' 
within which famines arise and must be analysed.

DOI: 10.1177/026010608600400203
PMID: 3737027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Holist Nurs Pract. 1994 Oct;9(1):41-7. doi: 10.1097/00004650-199410000-00008.

Ethical aspects of transformational leadership.

Cassidy VR, Koroll CJ.

The requirements of leadership in the current environment of health care reform 
necessitate a clear distinction between leadership and management, an alteration 
in traditional leadership roles, and an evaluation of the knowledge and skills 
needed to address the ethical issues that arise from such reform. 
Transformational leadership is well suited to the current climate in health care 
because of the manner in which it actively embraces and encourages innovation 
and change. The article explores the elements of transformational leadership, 
describes the need for transformational leaders to be cognizant of the ethical 
aspects of their roles, and outlines the responsibilities of transformational 
leaders as moral agents.

DOI: 10.1097/00004650-199410000-00008
PMID: 7798348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs. 1994 Sep;23(7):603-8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1552-6909.1994.tb01926.x.

Changes in maternity care and the impact on nurses and nursing practice.

Stolte K(1), Myers ST, Owen WL.

Author information:
(1)University of Oklahoma College of Nursing, Oklahoma City.

OBJECTIVE: To determine changes maternity nurses have experienced and the impact 
these changes have had on nursing practice.
DESIGN: Descriptive survey using a randomized sample.
PARTICIPANTS: Four hundred fifty-one inpatient female maternity nurses.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Changes in maternity care, impact of the changes on 
nursing practice, and personal and professional perceptions and activities 
before and after the changes.
RESULTS: Reported changes were use of technology, legal climate, shorter patient 
stay, cost containment, inclusion of family, cross training, consumer demand, 
and single-room maternity care. Inclusion of the family, technology, and 
single-room care were rated highly for worth and improvement in quality of care. 
Though described as challenging and rewarding, change was an energy drain. 
Change was often seen as a result of administrative mandate.
CONCLUSIONS: Perceptions of change vary, but no change is easy to implement. 
Opportunities for staff input, administrative support, and adequate time and 
staffing levels during change facilitate adjustment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1552-6909.1994.tb01926.x
PMID: 7996311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Health Care Manage Rev. 1987 Spring;12(2):43-9. doi: 
10.1097/00004010-198701220-00007.

Cultural change versus behavioral change.

Nordstrom RD, Allen BH.

Health care culture is a powerful force in hospitals that must be taken into 
consideration in attempting to effect changes in employees' behaviors. A survey 
can be taken to assess the cultural climate of a health care institution.

DOI: 10.1097/00004010-198701220-00007
PMID: 3583721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Nurse Educ Today. 1992 Apr;12(2):81-7. doi: 10.1016/0260-6917(92)90032-j.

From novice to expert: the use of intuitive knowledge as a basis for district 
nurse education.

Gatley EP.

Curriculum development in nursing should be a dynamic process set within a 
context which unites theory and practice. Nursing is operating within a climate 
of ubiquitous change and reliance must be placed upon a robust and 
professionally enhancing curriculum framework. At the University of Liverpool, 
the recently validated Diploma in District Nursing has been based upon the work 
of Patricia Benner 'From Novice to Expert' (1984). Benner's proposals are 
gaining considerable international credence and, whilst acknowledging that North 
American models are not always readily transferable into practice within the 
United Kingdom, the author explains why the combination of skills acquisition 
and clinical expertise provide an exciting framework pertinent to post 
registration courses such as district nursing. Those limitations of 
interpretation derived from culture and the institutional settings of the 
research are identified. The article which follows explains the reasons which 
underpin the adaptation of Benner's model to the education and practice of 
district nursing, identifies the advantages and limitations and concludes by 
describing how the educational change process was managed to support practice.

DOI: 10.1016/0260-6917(92)90032-j
PMID: 1584171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Healthc Manag. 1999 Nov-Dec;44(6):427-39.

Diversity leadership and organizational transformation: performance indicators 
for health services organizations.

Dreachslin JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Penn State Great Valley School of Graduate Professional Studies, Malvern, 
USA. jld13@psu.edu

Health services organizations can follow a five-part process to reposition 
themselves through diversity leadership. The first part of the process, 
discovery, refers to the emerging awareness of racial and ethnic diversity as a 
significant strategic issue; the second part, assessment, refers to systematic 
review of the organization's racial and ethnic diversity climate; the third 
part, exploration, denotes systematic training initiatives to improve the health 
services organization's ability to effectively manage diversity; the fourth 
part, transformation, refers to fundamental changes in organizational practices 
that result in a culture in which racial and ethnic diversity is valued; and the 
final part, revitalization, refers to renewal and expansion of racial and ethnic 
diversity initiatives to reward change agents and to include additional identity 
groups among the health services organization's diversity initiatives. This 
article presents a series of behaviorally based performance indicators for each 
of the five parts of the diversity leadership process. Healthcare executives are 
encouraged to assess their organization's strategic positioning against best 
demonstrated practices, as represented by the performance indicators. A method 
for analyzing organizational performance against the diversity leadership 
indicators is outlined as are suggestions for future research.

PMID: 10662430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Dev Biol Stand. 1999;100:159-70.

International challenges and public policy issues.

Morris N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Science & Technology Studies, University College London, UK.

The paper presents an overview of current public policy issues relating to 
biological standardisation and control, drawing on the extensive background 
material assembled for two recent international reviews, and previously 
published work. It identifies a number of factors which are destabilising the 
current system and promoting a climate for change. These include the squeeze on 
public sector resources, the growth in volume and complexity of biologicals, 
developing world needs, concerns about harmonisation and new social and ethical 
issues. It is argued that this situation presents important opportunities for 
reviewing the existing boundaries between regulatory scientists, industry, and 
the public, for international agreement on priorities and for harmonisation and 
mutual recognition. While considerable progress has already been made on these 
issues at national, regional and global level, there is a need for fuller 
international participation and the additional impetus that would come from a 
higher-profile commitment by governments. Such commitment will also be important 
for the vital questions of sustaining the scientific base and securing the 
resource for an effective, truly worldwide programme of standardisation and 
control. An international approach will also be essential in steering 
biologicals control through the difficult social and ethical questions of the 
future. WHO, in collaboration with national authorities, has a key role to play 
in these developments.

PMID: 10616188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Arch Environ Health. 1976 Jan-Feb;31(1):15-20. doi: 
10.1080/00039896.1976.10667183.

Climate and environment change in patients with chronic airway obstruction.

Skoogh BE, Simonsson BG, Berggren AG, Bergstr√∂m Z, Johansson M.

Psychological, clinical, and pulmonary physiological measurements were studied 
in ten patients with weather-sensitive chronic airway obstruction during one 
month in Gothenburg, Sweden, and immediately after for one month in the Canary 
Islands, a change to a drier and warmer climate. All patients improved according 
to psychological tests and claimed to be better. Objective measurements 
including peak expiratory flow rate, airway conductance, static lung volumes, 
and elastic lung recoil showed improvement in eight of ten patients, a change 
that we believe is due to the effect of climate.

DOI: 10.1080/00039896.1976.10667183
PMID: 1244804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Ann Trop Med Parasitol. 1995 Apr;89(2):135-47. doi: 
10.1080/00034983.1995.11812944.

Vector control in some countries of Southeast Asia: comparing the vectors and 
the strategies.

Meek SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Malaria Consortium, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, U.K.

The use of information on malaria vector behaviour in vector control is 
discussed in relation to the area of Southeast Asia comprising Cambodia, Laos, 
Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam. The major vectors in the region are Anopheles 
dirus, An. minimus, An. maculatus and An. sundaicus, of which An. dirus is the 
most important. Options for vector control and the biological features of 
mosquitoes, which would make them amenable to control by these measures, are 
listed. The methods with the greatest potential for controlling each of the four 
vector species are described. Experiences of vector control by residual 
spraying, insecticide-treated nets and larva control and of personal protection 
against the four vectors are outlined, and it is noted that choice of control 
strategy is often determined by epidemiological, economic and political 
considerations, whilst entomological observations may help to explain failures 
of control and to indicate alternative strategies. Future research needs include 
basic entomological field studies using the most appropriate indicators to 
detect changes related to rapidly changing environmental conditions, such as 
loss of forest and climate change. Further studies of the efficacy of 
insecticide-treated mosquito nets, with greater attention to study design, are 
needed before it can be assumed that they will work in Southeast Asia. At the 
same time, research to improve sustainable utilization of nets is important, 
bearing in mind that nets are not the only means to control malaria and should 
not drain resources from supervision and training, which improve access to 
diagnosis and treatment of malaria and other diseases. Research is needed to 
make decisions on whether vector control is appropriate in different 
environments, and, if so, how to carry it out in different health systems. 
Researchers need to play a greater role in making operational research 
(entomological, epidemiological, social, economic and health systems research) 
of good quality an integral component of implementation programmes.

DOI: 10.1080/00034983.1995.11812944
PMID: 7605123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Indian J Pediatr. 1990 Jul-Aug;57(4):563-6. doi: 10.1007/BF02726770.

Knowledge and practices among rural mothers in Haryana about childhood diarrhea.

Sood AK(1), Kapil U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive and Social Medicine, Medical College, Rohtak, 
Haryana.

Knowledge and practices of 108 rural mothers about childhood diarrhea, were 
determined by using pretested semi-structured interview schedules. The common 
causes of diarrhea reported were eruption of teeth (67.59%), eating of mud 
(51.85%), worm infestation (47.22%), change of climate (35.18%), poor personal 
hygiene (34.25%) and changes in diet (25.92%). Majority (83.33%) of mothers 
practiced food restriction during diarrhea. Seventy seven percent consulted 
their mother-in-laws in the first instance for treatment of diarrhea. The home 
remedies tried by mothers were, isabgol husk with curd (30.55%), ghee with tea 
(28.70%) water boiled with mint leaves (25.92%), local ghutti (22.22%) and 
unripe mango juice (16.66%). Majority of mothers (83.33%) believed that oral 
rehydration therapy alone, cannot treat diarrhea.

PIP: Knowledge and practice of 108 rural mothers concerning childhood diarrhea 
were determined by using pretested semistructured interview schedules. The 
common causes of diarrhea reported were eruption of teeth (67.59%), eating of 
mud (51.85%), worm infestation (47.22%), change of climate (35.18%), poor 
personal hygiene (34.25%), and changes in diet (25.96%). The majority of mothers 
(83.33%) practiced food restriction during diarrhea. 77% consulted their 
mothers-in-law initially concerning diarrhea treatment. The home remedies tried 
by mothers were: isabgol husk with curd (30.55%), ghee with tea (28.70%), water 
boiled with mint leaves (25.92%), local ghutti (22.22%), and unripe mango juice 
(16.66%). The majority also believed that oral rehydration therapy alone cannot 
cure diarrhea.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02726770
PMID: 2286409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Environ Health Perspect. 1997 Aug;105(8):794-9. doi: 10.1289/ehp.97105794.

Growing pains in South America.

Joyce S.

PIP: This article describes some negative effects from modernization and urban 
growth in South America, including disease, pesticides, occupational hazards, 
poor environmental controls of water and garbage, sanitation, and environmental 
degradation. South America is following the global trend toward urbanization and 
the problems that accompany it. Agricultural expansion led to an expanded market 
for pesticides that includes the deadly DDT, paraquat, and heptachlor. Brazil 
and Colombia are the largest consumers. Latin American officials justify use of 
DDT, which is banned in the US and many European countries, as an effective 
means of combating mosquitos that carry malaria. Exposure occurs during 
harvesting, transporting, forestry, livestock farming, and vector control 
activities. Methyl bromide, which is used post-harvest and as a soil fumigant, 
is dangerous enough to be banned in the US in 2001, and in developing countries 
in 2002. Exposure to toxic chemicals can severely inhibit enzyme action that is 
necessary for neurological functioning. A hot climate, which prevents protective 
clothing, lack of education on proper application, and absence of water to wash 
exposed skin, make pesticide protection very difficult. Over 40 million 
agricultural workers are at risk of pesticide poisoning. Habitat destruction has 
contributed to increased mosquito infestations. Children in the workplace are at 
even greater risk of noise pollution and chemical poisoning. South America 
pollutes almost 11 times more fresh water per capita than Europe. About 70% of 
domestic garbage is collected, and about 30% is disposed of correctly. Only 10% 
of urban wastewater is treated before discharge into waterways. The loss of 
coastal wetlands reduces the ability of waterways to filter and absorb 
nutrients. Environmental health problems suggest an interlinkage between 
environmental sustainability, human health, and economic growth.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.97105794
PMCID: PMC1470206
PMID: 9347893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Health Care Superv. 1993 Dec;12(2):32-45.

Reflections on total quality management and health care supervisors.

Smith HL(1), Discenza R, Piland NF.

Author information:
(1)Anderson Schools of Management, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

Total quality management (TQM) has become an integral process in service 
delivery for many health care organizations. This article reviews the 
fundamental concepts underlying TQM and how TQM is relevant to health care 
supervisors. In many respects TQM represents a contemporary approach to 
supervising innovation and change, to analytically solving customer problems, 
and to implementing continuous quality improvement. Several strategies are 
examined that health care supervisors can adopt for improving service quality, 
including cultivating a climate for innovation, motivating by example, leading 
staff to do what is right and to tolerate no service delivery errors, retraining 
staff, developing control systems, and creating barrier-free organizations. 
These strategies are examined from the perspective of achieving continuous 
improvement in health care settings.

PMID: 10130077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Bull Mem Acad R Med Belg. 1991;146(11-12):426-56.

[The greenhouse effect and human health].

[Article in French]

Berger A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut d'Astronomie et de G√©ophysique G. Lema√Ætre, Universit√© catholique de 
Louvain-l-N.

Numerous scenarios describing the potential evolution of man's activities during 
the next few decades enable to predict the components of the future 
environmental system. On this basis and using the most reliable models, it may 
be predicted that, unless we alter our developmental policy, the Earth system 
will be significantly perturbed during the course of the 21st century. In 
particular, the greenhouse warming will cause profound changes in climatic zones 
as we know them to-day and, consequently, in regional climates and in the 
agricultural, economic, social and health infrastructures associated with them. 
According to the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change, the 
Business-as-Usual scenario of emission would lead to a warming of about 3 
degrees C above the 1990 level by the end of the next century. Sea level will 
rise due to the thermal expansion of the warmer oceans and potential melting of 
glaciers with a "best" estimate of 60 cm for the end of the XXIst century. Much 
more needs to be known about man-made effects on his surroundings, but action 
must be taken rapidly and effectively to ensure that instead of destroying the 
basis for human life on Earth, man's ingenuity is applied to saving and 
improving it.

PMID: 1840990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J R Soc Health. 1992 Dec;112(6):286-90. doi: 10.1177/146642409211200616.

Zimbabwe's success story in education and health: will it weather economic 
structural adjustment?

Tumwine JK.

The beginning of the 1980s saw the birth of Zimbabwe as a result of a protracted 
liberation war. It coincided with global interest in primary health care, the 
concept of universal primary school education and, unfortunately, moves towards 
economic stabilization and structural adjustment programmes. Economic structural 
adjustment was adopted by several sub Saharan African countries with dire 
consequences for the poor and vulnerable. Zimbabwe's commitment to social 
justice and to equitable distribution of resources demonstrated a practical move 
away from the culture of rhetoric so characteristic of many governments and 
non-governmental organisations and agencies. This commitment has been translated 
into impressive improvements in health and education. Current evidence shows 
that education has had a positive impact on health and related areas like 
contraceptive use, child mortality and the nutrition status of children. 
Conversely nutrition and health conditions among school children are important 
determinants of educational outcomes. Hitherto Zimbabwe's economy has been 
sufficiently strong to avoid excessive dependence on the International Monetary 
Fund, the World Bank and other foreign financial institutions. Unfortunately, 
however, the current economic recession together with economic structural 
adjustment programmes are beginning to have a negative impact on health and 
education. Will true synergism between health and education weather these 
structural problems? It seems that the people and government of Zimbabwe have 
the capacity and resolve to weather such a storm.

PIP: Since independence in 1980, Zimbabwe has undergone changes to improve 
primary health care, to involve every child in primary school education, and to 
build a stable economy. The commitment to social justice and equitable 
distribution of resources was put into practice with positive results for 
contraceptive use, child mortality, nutrition, and education. The current 
economic recession puts these advances in jeopardy. Zimbabwe, unlike other 
sub-Saharan African countries, had a sound, diversified economy and a government 
committed to democracy and moderate social reforms. A brief discussion focuses 
on the debt crisis and how other African countries have been affected. In 
Zimbabwe, the end of apartheid brought with it the establishment of day schools, 
free tuition, and a dramatic increase in enrollment in both primary and 
secondary schools among the black population. In 1989, 2.3 million were 
attending primary school with a completion rate of 75%. The consequence of rapid 
enrollment has been teacher retention problems, shortages of text books, and 
insufficient capital investment. Drop out rates are a concern and measures have 
been introduced to alleviate the pressures on children to participate in 
productive work and to improve health. Education is a concern because of its 
relationship with health. Compulsory education is not possible at this time 
because of the economic climate favoring sharing or cost recovery programs. The 
disparities in the health sector were also changed after independence. 
Impressive results show a decline in infant mortality to 63/1000 in 1989 and an 
80% full immunization rate for children aged 12-23 months. Zimbabwe has the 
highest rate of contraceptive prevalence (43% are current users and an 
additional 36% were prior users). High contraceptive use is related to having a 
secondary education and living in an urban area. Education affects the desire 
for more children; i.e., 45% of women with 4 or more children and no formal 
education desire limiting the number of children, while 65% of women with a 
secondary education wish to do so. Educational status affects child survival and 
the quality of life of surviving children. It is hoped that the resolve of 
Zimbabweans will prevent the expected detrimental effects of economic structural 
adjustment on health and education.

DOI: 10.1177/146642409211200616
PMID: 1469676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Trop Anim Health Prod. 1996 Nov;28(4):257-65. doi: 10.1007/BF02240814.

Integrated control of tropical animal parasitoses.

Uilenberg G.

In the past, the control of parasites of domestic animals has relied mainly on 
the use of drugs and pesticides. Although these compounds are still of great 
importance in the prevention and treatment of parasitic diseases, the accent has 
shifted in recent years to a more flexible approach, integrating various other 
control measures. The main reasons for this change are: development of 
resistance of the parasites against the compounds used; reduced development of 
new compounds to overcome resistance (increasingly stringent regulations on 
toxicity and residues, resulting in very high research and development costs, 
insufficient return for industry because of short life-span of new products due 
to resistance, and limited and poor markets for compounds against parasites in 
developing countries); increasing cost of new products for the user; problems 
associated with toxicity, environmental pollution and residues in animal 
products. Integrated parasite management makes use, where possible, of 
biological and mechanical control methods, of acquired and innate host 
resistance, and of genetical, ecological, sanitary and regulatory procedures, 
although chemical control can seldom be entirely abolished. Cost-effectiveness 
and sustainability in all respects are of primary importance.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02240814
PMID: 8983129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Fam Plann Perspect. 1983 Sep-Oct;15(5):218-20, 222-3.

Self-sustaining clinics: innovation or retreat?

Landman LC.

PIP: Can voluntary, nonprofit family planning clinics continue to provide 
high-quality reproductive health care to low-income women and to teenagers at no 
cost or low cost in face of ever diminishing federal support? And if the clinics 
must change to accommodate to a different economic and political climate than 
the one in which the national family planning program originated and developed, 
in what directions will they move? These issues were explored at sessions of the 
110th annual meeting of the American Public Health Association and the 11th 
annual meeting of the National Family Planning and Reproductive Health 
Association. A number of examples from various states of the self-sustaining 
mode of delivery of family planning services are described in this paper. In a 
Colorado agency, only 2 types of staff are employed, specialists (such as 
clinicians, nurse practitioners or physician assistants) and generalists. There 
are no counselors, or lab technicians, or educators, and fewer employees are 
needed as everyone can do everything from working the cash register to cleaning 
the waiting room. There is no billing procedure as the cost for services are 
explained when the appointment is made, and the woman is told to bring cash or a 
credit card with her. Another agency in Pennsylvania began its path toward 
self-sufficiency by obtaining a commitment for greater self-sufficiency from its 
Board and staff, by careful cash management and investment, by improved 
productivity cost containment, adequate fees, and improved fee collection, and a 
vigorous program to raise private funds. An agency in Wisconsin was able to 
streamline its administration and services by examining the traditional mode, 
which requires a highly specialized staff, in terms of the needs of the current 
population rather than that of the 1960s for which the paradigm was created. The 
efficiency model was introduced in most of the agency's clinics, allowing for a 
significantly reduced staff. A great many other measures are described as a 
means of implementing self-sustaining family planning services.

PMID: 6653737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Asia Pac J Public Health. 1989;3(3):219-23. doi: 10.1177/101053958900300308.

Knowledge, attitude and practice factors in childhood acute respiratory 
infections in a peninsular Malaysia health district.

Vasanthamala A, Arokiasamy JT.

This study compares the knowledge, attitudes and practice of mothers in two 
ethnic groups with regard to acute respiratory infections (ARI) in their child. 
Most had traditional beliefs as to the cause of ARI with only a minority knowing 
the causes. Most mothers were aware of the effect of frequent attacks of ARI on 
the health status of their child and of the importance of early treatment. 
Reasons for their becoming worried during an episode of ARI in their child 
indicated that problems of distance, transportation and arrangements for care of 
their other children predominate. A large proportion of the respondents felt 
that their present knowledge of ARI was inadequate and were thus interested in 
obtaining more information.

PIP: Nurses interviewed 100 Malay and 100 Chinese mothers with a child 5 years 
old who attended child health clinics in Negri Sembilan, Malaysia about acute 
respiratory infections (ARIs). The mean age and family size, educational status, 
and income levels were similar between the 2 groups. The mothers believed the 
leading causes of ARIs in children to be germs, food, and change in climate. 70% 
of Malays worried when their child had a mild ARI and 85% would seek treatment 
as soon as possible. 57% of the Chinese worried when their child had a mild ARI 
and 70% would seek treatment as soon as possible. No mother would wait to seek 
treatment in a case of severe ARI. The leading reason for worry for both the 
Malays and Chinese was that the child could become weak. The 2nd reason for the 
Malays was that the child could die whereas for the Chinese it was that the ill 
child could infect others. 68% of the Malays and 57% of the Chinese would not 
give cooling foods (fruits and vegetables) to their ill child. 20% of the Malays 
and 36% of the Chinese did not believe in food taboos. Most mothers had some 
knowledge about the type of diet suitable during an ARI. 93% of the Malays would 
take their child to a health center or hospital for treatment, while only 69% of 
the Chinese would do so. 24% of the Chinese would purchase medicine to treat 
their child. The Chinese had more problems taking their child for treatment of 
ARI than the Malays. For the Chinese, the health was too far or they had no 
time. Most mothers (Malays 68%, Chinese 71%) admitted not knowing much about 
ARIs and wished to learn more (Malays 89%, Chinese 92%). Most mothers wanted the 
information from health personnel. 21% of the Chinese could obtain information 
from reading. Health personnel should inform mothers more often about ARIs.

DOI: 10.1177/101053958900300308
PMID: 2620023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Int Hist Nurs J. 2000 Summer;5(3):22-9.

Team work and collaboration: the position of district nursing 1948-1974.

Bliss J(1), While A.

Author information:
(1)Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery, King's College, London, 
UK.

Much has been written regarding the challenges facing district nursing in light 
of the constant change and development of the NHS. This paper follows the 
chronological development of district nursing up to the reorganization of the 
NHS in 1974. The paper commences with a brief outline of the origins of district 
nursing as a charitable activity before the inception of the NHS and moves on to 
consider the relationship between district nurses and general practitioners. A 
review of policy and legislation identifies that district nurses, in the early 
days of the NHS, were working for the GP, no longer an autonomous practitioner 
of a charitable organization. Other challenges experienced by district nurses 
included being employed by the Local Health Authority, a separate organization 
to the NHS. By exploring the clinical practice of district nurses, alongside the 
management and organization of district nursing it is possible to critically 
discuss the challenges facing district nurses in the current health care climate 
of teamwork and collaboration.

PMID: 11624734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Psychol Rep. 2000 Apr;86(2):608-10. doi: 10.2466/pr0.2000.86.2.608.

Organizational change: initial results in a health care setting.

Peterson FL(1), Cooper RF, Scherer RF.

Author information:
(1)Wright State University, USA.

An applied study was conducted in a federal health care facility to assess 
change in organizational climate variables over a 7-yr. period. Using the Survey 
of Organizations--2000, preliminary results show improvements on five climate 
indicators from Time 1 to Time 2 of the survey. Potential explanations for the 
positive changes are provided.

DOI: 10.2466/pr0.2000.86.2.608
PMID: 10840919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Trop Med Int Health. 1997 Dec;2(12):1122-7. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-3156.1997.d01-210.x.

Predicting high-risk years for malaria in Colombia using parameters of El Ni√±o 
Southern Oscillation.

Bouma MJ(1), Poveda G, Rojas W, Chavasse D, Qui√±ones M, Cox J, Patz J.

Author information:
(1)DFID Malaria Programme, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, UK.

The interannual variation in malaria cases in Colombia between 1960 and 1992 
shows a close association with a periodic climatic phenomenon known as El Ni√±o 
Southern Oscillation (ENSO). Compared with other years, malaria cases increased 
by 17.3% during a Ni√±o year and by 35.1% in the post-Ni√±o year. The annual total 
number of malaria cases is also strongly correlated (r = 0.62, P < 0.001) with 
sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies in the eastern equatorial Pacific, a 
principal parameter of ENSO. The strong relation between malaria and ENSO in 
Colombia can be used to predict high and low-risk years for malaria with 
sufficient time to mobilize resources to reduce the impact of epidemics. In view 
of the current El Ni√±o conditions, we anticipate an increase in malaria cases in 
Colombia in 1998. Further studies to elucidate the mechanisms which underlie the 
association are required. As Colombia has a wide range of climatic conditions, 
regional studies relating climate and vector ecology to malaria incidence may 
further improve an ENSO-based early warning system. Predicting malaria risk 
associated with ENSO and related climate variables may also serve as a 
short-term analogue for predicting longer-term effects posed by global climate 
change.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3156.1997.d01-210.x
PMID: 9438466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 30;96(7):3420-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.7.3420.

Potential effects of gas hydrate on human welfare.

Kvenvolden KA(1).

Author information:
(1)U.S. Geological Survey, 345 Middlefield Road, MS999, Menlo Park, CA 94025, 
USA. kk@octopus.wr.usgs.gov

For almost 30 years. serious interest has been directed toward natural gas 
hydrate, a crystalline solid composed of water and methane, as a potential (i) 
energy resource, (ii) factor in global climate change, and (iii) submarine 
geohazard. Although each of these issues can affect human welfare, only (iii) is 
considered to be of immediate importance. Assessments of gas hydrate as an 
energy resource have often been overly optimistic, based in part on its very 
high methane content and on its worldwide occurrence in continental margins. 
Although these attributes are attractive, geologic settings, reservoir 
properties, and phase-equilibria considerations diminish the energy resource 
potential of natural gas hydrate. The possible role of gas hydrate in global 
climate change has been often overstated. Although methane is a "greenhouse" gas 
in the atmosphere, much methane from dissociated gas hydrate may never reach the 
atmosphere, but rather may be converted to carbon dioxide and sequestered by the 
hydrosphere/biosphere before reaching the atmosphere. Thus, methane from gas 
hydrate may have little opportunity to affect global climate change. However, 
submarine geohazards (such as sediment instabilities and slope failures on local 
and regional scales, leading to debris flows, slumps, slides, and possible 
tsunamis) caused by gas-hydrate dissociation are of immediate and increasing 
importance as humankind moves to exploit seabed resources in ever-deepening 
waters of coastal oceans. The vulnerability of gas hydrate to temperature and 
sea level changes enhances the instability of deep-water oceanic sediments, and 
thus human activities and installations in this setting can be affected.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.7.3420
PMCID: PMC34283
PMID: 10097052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Adv Nurs. 1997 Mar;25(3):602-14. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.1997025602.x.

Constructing career pathways in nursing: some issues for research and policy.

Robinson S(1), Murrells T, Marsland L.

Author information:
(1)Nursing Research Unit, King's College, London, England.

Nurses currently construct careers in a climate of continuing occupational and 
organizational change. A longitudinal project is in progress which is 
documenting the post-qualification histories of a cohort of registered general 
nurses, and studying the extent to which their careers represent occupational 
choice, a response to organizational constraints, or a combination of both. 
Three elements comprise the core of the research: questions which provide 
information on the cohort's career plans, charts which document their career 
histories and questions which explore the relationship between the two. The 
basis of the design is the first element, and this paper focuses on the problems 
encountered in designing the questions and routing structures which enabled all 
cohort members to describe their plans for the future. The importance of 
extensive pilot work is demonstrated in the development of options tailored for 
each potential career pathway and to allow expressions of uncertainty to emerge 
at points when appropriate to respondents. Of the 1164 members of the cohort, 
1015 returned the questionnaire; a response rate of 87%. Findings are presented 
on the cohort's plans at qualification. The majority of respondents (86%) saw 
themselves as remaining in nursing and in clinical practice in the early 
post-qualification period. Eighteen per cent said they intended to practise 
abroad at some point, 30% foresaw a likelihood of working in the private sector, 
59% wanted to take one or more English National Board courses and 42% expressed 
interest in obtaining an undergraduate or postgraduate degree.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.1997025602.x
PMID: 9080289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Aust N Z J Med. 2000 Oct;30(5):618-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2000.tb00864.x.

The potential impact of global environmental change on population health.

Tong S(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Public Health Research, Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane.

Due to rapid industrial changes and increased pressure of people on fragile 
ecosystems, large-scale environmental perturbations have been occurring on 
Earth. Major current environmental problems that can be expected to have a 
substantial effect on human health include human-induced climate change and 
stratosphere ozone depletion, because they threaten the ecological support 
systems on which human life depends. The most serious potential consequence of 
global environmental change is the erosion of Earth's life-support systems. The 
public health assessments of the present and future anthropogenic damage to the 
biosphere have important implications for human health and wellbeing. Medical 
practitioners have an important role to play in this field.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2000.tb00864.x
PMID: 11108073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Occup Med. 1985 Aug;27(8):570-6. doi: 10.1097/00043764-198508000-00014.

Occupational and psychosocial stress among commercial aviation pilots.

Cooper CL, Sloan S.

The sources of occupational and domestic stress, together with life events and 
coping strategies, were assessed in terms of their influence on job 
dissatisfaction, mental health, and performance among a group of 442 commercial 
airline pilots. It was found that self-perceived poor performance was associated 
with job-related factors such as fatigue and anxiety about required courses, 
performance checks, and insufficient flying time, particularly among older 
pilots. Job dissatisfaction was predicted by lack of career opportunities, poor 
organizational climate and morale, and lack of autonomy at work, together with 
some domestic stressors (e.g., family health). Overall mental ill-health was 
found to be associated with lack of autonomy at work, fatigue, and flying 
patterns, together with an inability to relax and a lack of social support.

DOI: 10.1097/00043764-198508000-00014
PMID: 4032093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Int J Epidemiol. 1992 Feb;21(1):91-100. doi: 10.1093/ije/21.1.91.

Seasonality of preterm births in Japan.

Matsuda S(1), Kahyo H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Ecology, School of Medicine, University of Occupational 
and Environmental Health, Japan.

Seasonal variations in the proportion of preterm births in Japan from January 
1979 to December 1983 are analysed using a traditional method of time-series 
analysis, which divides the variation in a series into trend, seasonal 
variation, other cyclic change, and remaining irregular fluctuations. It is 
shown that the proportion of preterm births in Japan have a clear seasonal 
periodicity with two peaks in summer and winter. Analysis of seasonality by 
period of gestation shows that interesting differences in kurtosis and skewness 
exist between summer and winter, i.e. the summer increase in preterm births was 
characterized by an increase of skewness which means an extension of the lower 
part of the distribution. On the other hand, the winter increase was 
characterized by a decrease of kurtosis which corresponds to a flat-topped 
distribution. This result suggests that causes of preterm births might be 
different between the two seasons. Theoretical simulations based on actual birth 
data in Japan over the period, are carried out to examine how season of 
conception could influence seasonal variations in the proportion of preterm 
births. Results show that, at least for first births, seasonality in conception 
rates could be one explanatory factor for the observed seasonal variation in 
proportions of preterm births. Another analysis reveals that conception in May 
and June are more likely to result in preterm births in Japan.

PIP: A time series analysis using virtually 100% complete vital statistics data 
was conducted to examine seasonality of premature births in Japan between 
1979-1983. Developments in neonatal care have resulted in a decreasing trend in 
overall neonatal mortality rates (from 8.8 to 4.9% between 1980-1985), but an 
upward trend in premature births was observed during this time period. These 
rates were considerably greater in hospitals without a neonatal intensive care 
unit. Preterm births peaked in winter and summer (or the rainy season). Male 1st 
births climaxed in June and female 1st births in July, but this difference was 
not significant. Subsequent births had a lower peak and occurred later in the 
summer than 1st births. Period of gestation was used to analyze seasonality. The 
results showed an increase of skewness (an extension of the lower part of the 
distribution) for the summer increase in premature births. Yet a decrease of 
kurtosis (a flat-topped distribution) characterized the winter increase. The 
differences in the distributions are thought to mean that the cause of 
prematurity might be different between the 2 seasons. Also examined was season 
of conception data to see if season of conception could affect seasonal 
variations. This analysis showed that, at least for 1st births, seasonality of 
conception rates could account for the seasonal variation in premature births. 
Conception in May and June tended to result in premature births. Well planned, 
epidemiologic or experimental studies are needed to determine the association 
between specific factors and premature births so as to explain seasonality of 
premature births in Japan.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/21.1.91
PMID: 1544764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Int J Health Serv. 1987;17(4):635-50. doi: 10.2190/FD8R-4DU5-BNBW-X93A.

Workers' health and safety in Australia: an overview.

Pearse W, Refshauge C.

In this article we explore some of the precursors and background to the recent 
wave of administrative and legislative change in the field of occupational 
health and safety in Australia. The influences of the New Left and women's 
movement in the late 1960s and early 1970s are seen to be crucial in creating a 
climate in which the issue of workers' health could be raised. It is then argued 
that the labor movement has been fundamentally important in determining the 
shape and extent of reform. Current organizational and legal developments are 
described and discussed in the context of Australian society.

DOI: 10.2190/FD8R-4DU5-BNBW-X93A
PMID: 3692647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Proc AMIA Symp. 2000:853-7.

Comparing user acceptance of a computer system in two pediatric offices: a 
qualitative study.

Travers DA(1), Downs SM.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.

The purpose of this qualitative study was to examine user acceptance of a 
clinical computer system in two pediatric practices in the southeast. Data were 
gathered through interviews with practice and IS staff, observations in the 
clinical area, and review of system implementation records. Five months after 
implementation, Practice A continued to use the system but Practice B had quit 
using it because it was unacceptable to the users. The results are presented 
here, in relation to a conceptual framework, which was originally developed to 
describe the process of successful implementation of research findings into 
practice. Five main themes were identified relative to the differences in user 
acceptance at the two practices: 1) Benefits versus expense of system use 
varied, 2) Organizational cultures differed, 3) IS staff's relationship with 
practices differed, 4) Post-implementation experiences differed, and 5) Transfer 
of technology from the academic center to private practice proved challenging in 
Practice B. The findings indicate a need for the development and validation of 
tools to measure healthcare organizational climate and readiness for change.

PMCID: PMC2243727
PMID: 11080005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Med Hypotheses. 1985 May;17(1):39-46. doi: 10.1016/0306-9877(85)90018-0.

A hypothesis on the role of pheromones on age of menarche.

Burger J, Gochfeld M.

Over the last century and a half there has been a secular decline in the age of 
menarche in Western, industrialized cultures. This trend has been largely 
ascribed to improved nutrition and health, and we offer an alternative 
hypothesis that changes in socio-economic conditions have resulted in changes in 
the pheromonal climate to which prepubertal females are exposed, thereby 
affecting onset of menarche. Extensive data from non-human mammalian studies 
indicate that puberty in females is delayed by exposure to adult females, and 
accelerated by exposure to adult males. The mechanism is pheromonal. The 
pheromonal climate of the home may have changed since mothers are in the home 
less (more women now work) and fathers are in the home more (work day of 8 
rather than 14 hr). Assuming humans respond similarly to pheromones, this change 
would contribute to a decline in age of menarche.

DOI: 10.1016/0306-9877(85)90018-0
PMID: 3892250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. BMJ. 1997 Jun 7;314(7095):1658-63. doi: 10.1136/bmj.314.7095.1658.

Short-term effects of ambient sulphur dioxide and particulate matter on 
mortality in 12 European cities: results from time series data from the APHEA 
project. Air Pollution and Health: a European Approach.

Katsouyanni K(1), Touloumi G, Spix C, Schwartz J, Balducci F, Medina S, Rossi G, 
Wojtyniak B, Sunyer J, Bacharova L, Schouten JP, Ponka A, Anderson HR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Athens Medical School, 
Greece.

Comment in
    BMJ. 1998 Jun 27;316(7149):1982.

OBJECTIVES: To carry out a prospective combined quantitative analysis of the 
associations between all cause mortality and ambient particulate matter and 
sulphur dioxide.
DESIGN: Analysis of time series data on daily number of deaths from all causes 
and concentrations of sulphur dioxide and particulate matter (measured as black 
smoke or particles smaller than 10 microns in diameter (PM10)) and potential 
confounders.
SETTING: 12 European cities in the APHEA project (Air Pollution and Health: a 
European Approach).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Relative risk of death.
RESULTS: In western European cities it was found that an increase of 50 
micrograms/m3 in sulphur dioxide or black smoke was associated with a 3% (95% 
confidence interval 2% to 4%) increase in daily mortality and the corresponding 
figure for PM10 was 2% (1% to 3%). In central eastern European cities the 
increase in mortality associated with a 50 micrograms/m3 change in sulphur 
dioxide was 0.8% (-0.1% to 2.4%) and in black smoke 0.6% (0.1% to 1.1%). 
Cumulative effects of prolonged (two to four days) exposure to air pollutants 
resulted in estimates comparable with the one day effects. The effects of both 
pollutants were stronger during the summer and were mutually independent.
CONCLUSIONS: The internal consistency of the results in western European cities 
with wide differences in climate and environmental conditions suggest that these 
associations may be causal. The long term health impact of these effects is 
uncertain, but today's relatively low levels of sulphur dioxide and particles 
still have detectable short term effects on health and further reductions in air 
pollution are advisable.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.314.7095.1658
PMCID: PMC2126873
PMID: 9180068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Public Health Rep. 2000 Mar-Jun;115(2-3):151-6. doi: 10.1093/phr/115.2.151.

Healthy communities must also be sustainable communities.

Hancock T(1).

Author information:
(1)thancock@on.aibn.com

The author contends that healthy communities must be both environmentally and 
socially sustainable, given that health depends on the quality of the built and 
natural environments, and that global change resulting from the industrial 
economy is affecting the web of life. He argues that suburban sprawl wastes 
scarce resources and disproportionately places those resources in the hands of 
suburban dwellers. Urban areas can be made more environmentally sustainable, 
especially with respect to energy consumption, which will help reduce air 
pollution and climate change and contribute in other ways to improved health.

DOI: 10.1093/phr/115.2.151
PMCID: PMC1308704
PMID: 10968747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Q J Nucl Med. 2000 Jun;44(2):138-52.

Clinical and economic outcomes assessment in nuclear cardiology.

Shaw LJ(1), Miller DD, Berman DS, Hachamovitch R.

Author information:
(1)Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA. ishaw@cces.emory.edu

The future of nuclear medicine procedures, as understood within our current 
economic climate, depends upon its ability to provide relevant clinical 
information at similar or lower comparative costs. With an ever-increasing 
emphasis on cost containment, outcome assessment forms the basis of preserving 
the quality of patient care. Today, outcomes assessment encompasses a wide array 
of subjects including clinical, economic, and humanistic (i.e., quality of life) 
outcomes. For nuclear cardiology, evidence-based medicine would require a 
threshold level of evidence in order to justify the added cost of any test in a 
patient's work-up. This evidence would include large multicenter, observational 
series as well as randomized trial data in sufficiently large and diverse 
patient populations. The new movement in evidence-based medicine is also being 
applied to the introduction of new technologies, in particular when comparative 
modalities exist. In the past 5 years, we have seen a dramatic shift in the 
quality of outcomes data published in nuclear cardiology. This includes the use 
of statistically rigorous risk-adjusted techniques as well as large populations 
(i.e., > 500 patients) representing multiple diverse medical care settings. This 
has been the direct result of the development of multiple outcomes databases 
that have now amassed thousands of patients worth of data. One of the benefits 
of examining outcomes in large patient datasets is the ability to assess 
individual endpoints (e.g., cardiac death) as compared with smaller datasets 
that often assess combined endpoints (e.g., death, myocardial infarction, or 
unstable angina). New technologies for the diagnosis of coronary artery disease 
have contributed to the rising costs of care. In the United States and in 
Europe, costs of care have risen dramatically, consuming an ever-increasing 
amount of available resources. The overuse of diagnostic angiography often leads 
to unnecessary revascularization that does not lead to improvement in outcome. 
Thus, the potential exists that stress SPECT imaging, a highly effective 
diagnostic tool, could effect substantial change in reducing inappropriate use 
of an invasive procedure resulting in cost effective cardiac care. A synthesis 
of current economic evidence in gated SPECT imaging will be presented. In 
conclusion, a current state of the evidence review is presented on the clinical 
and economic data using nuclear cardiology imaging.

PMID: 10967624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 1998 Aug;22 Suppl 2:S48-51.

National campaigns to promote physical activity: can they make a difference?

Cavill N(1).

Author information:
(1)Health Education Authority, London, UK.

Mass media campaigns are one of the interventions used in health promotion, to 
stimulate population-level changes in behavior. A review of the literature found 
only three studies concerned with the effectiveness of national health promotion 
campaigns that used the mass media to promote physical activity. These showed 
that campaigns could help to change levels of knowledge and attitudes towards 
physical activity, but had limited short-term impact on physical activity 
participation. Reviews of the role of mass media in other health topics, also 
showed limited evidence of short-term behaviour change. The important broader 
role of campaigns is influencing the climate of public opinion in favour of 
health promoting public policies and providing an overall framework or umbrella 
under which a broader range of health promotion initiatives can take place. In 
particular, they appear to be useful to professionals working at a community 
level, as they provide the backdrop for more detailed community-level or 
interpersonal interventions.

PMID: 9778096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Hosp Community Psychiatry. 1986 Aug;37(8):795-802. doi: 10.1176/ps.37.8.795.

The Italian experience in mental health care.

Jones K, Poletti A.

Italy's Law 180, passed in 1978, abolished mental hospitals and replaced them 
with community services. The Italian literature suggests that the law has been 
far less successful in improving services for mental patients than reports by 
foreign visitors have indicated. The authors visited Italy on two occasions in 
1984 and 1985 to assess for themselves the impact of the law. In many parts of 
the country hospitals were still open but badly understaffed and physically 
deteriorated; in Trieste, where the reform movement started, there was a good 
system of services, but a hospital whose closing had been publicly celebrated 
still housed several hundred patients. The authors describe the social and 
political climate in which Law 180 was passed, discuss the central role of 
Franco Basaglia and his Psichiatria Democratica movement, summarize the findings 
of their two visits, and attempt to explain why members of Psichiatria 
Democratica consider hospitals that remain open to be closed.

DOI: 10.1176/ps.37.8.795
PMID: 3733010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Int J Biometeorol. 2000 Nov;44(4):190-7. doi: 10.1007/s004840000070.

Heat-stress-related mortality in five cities in Southern Ontario: 1980-1996.

Smoyer KE(1), Rainham DG, Hewko JN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada. Karen.Smoyer@ualberta.ca

The Toronto-Windsor corridor of Southern Ontario, Canada, experiences hot and 
humid weather conditions in summer, thus exposing the population to heat stress 
and a greater risk of mortality. In the event of a climate change, heat-stress 
conditions may become more frequent and severe in Southern Ontario. To assess 
the impact of summer weather on health, we analyzed heat-related mortality in 
the elderly (older than 64 years) in the metropolitan areas of Windsor, London, 
Kitchener-Waterloo-Cambridge, Hamilton, and Toronto for a 17-year period. 
Demographic, socioeconomic, and housing factors were also evaluated to assess 
their effect on the potential of the population to adapt and their vulnerability 
to heat stress. Heat-stress days were defined as those with an apparent 
temperature (heat index) above 32 degrees C. Mortality among the elderly was 
significantly higher on heat-stress days than on non-heat-stress days in all 
cities except Windsor. The strongest relationships occurred in Toronto and 
London, followed by Hamilton. Cities with the greatest heat-related mortality 
have relatively high levels of urbanization and high costs of living. Even 
without the warming induced by a climate change, (1) vulnerability is likely to 
increase as the population ages, and (2) ongoing urban development and sprawl 
are expected to intensify heat-stress conditions in Southern Ontario. Actions 
should be taken to reduce vulnerability to heat stress conditions, and to 
develop a comprehensive hot weather watch/warning system for the region.

DOI: 10.1007/s004840000070
PMID: 11131291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Soc Sci Med. 1999 May;48(9):1247-58. doi: 10.1016/s0277-9536(98)00424-9.

No struggle, no strength: how pharmacists lost their monopoly.

Morgall JM(1), Almarsd√≥ttir AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Social Pharmacy, Royal Danish School of Pharmacy, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. jam@mail.dfh.dk

Research accounts of the struggle of professions to attain and maintain a 
monopoly, strategies of exclusion and usurpation, make for interesting and often 
exciting reading. The purpose of this article is to present a less frequently 
reported phenomenon--the study of a profession that had a monopoly, and then 
lost it. The authors attempt to answer the question: under what circumstances 
will a profession support the state in breaking their own monopoly? The study 
looked at the pharmacy profession in Iceland in the light of the recent change 
in drug legislation. Interviews with key actors in the pharmacy profession were 
conducted to gain an understanding of how they interpreted and experienced this 
change. Three factors contributed to the break in the professional monopoly: (1) 
political desire to take advantage of new competition and deregulation policy, 
(2) desire to cut the health budget and (3) internal divisions within the 
profession. The results of the study revealed at least four internal divisions 
within the pharmacy profession: (1) urban/rural, (2) employer/employee, (3) 
lower/higher education and (4) young/old. The article illustrates how a 
profession weakened by internal strife became prey to the government's cost 
cutting activities. This study is an example of how internal conflicts not only 
weakened the profession, but created a climate conducive to losing its monopoly. 
Our findings raise fundamental questions about the future of professions in 
society today.

DOI: 10.1016/s0277-9536(98)00424-9
PMID: 10220023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Integration. 1999 Winter;(62):32-3.

Client-oriented services. JICA Reproductive Health Project. Yen Thanh district.

Nguyen Nhu Linh.

PIP: This article reports on the People's Committee of Yen Thanh District and 
their efforts toward the modernization of agriculture. The Committee's course of 
action included 1) an introduction of hybrid seeds that yield a higher quantity 
and quality of crops; 2) a selection and cultivation of such crops that are the 
most suitable to the local climate; 3) an adjustment of sewing and harvesting, 
taking into consideration the change in the climate; and 4) the use of modern 
machines, equipment and tools. Many significant changes have been taking place 
ever since; namely, farmers have been raising three crops a year in many parts 
of the district, where several years ago they could raise only two crops a year. 
In addition, the per capita yield of crops increased. For example, the per 
capita yield of rice rose 600 kg in 1999, up 50% from the level of 1994. 
Meanwhile, the Committee has also paid more attention to the provision of 
adequate health care for women. In this respect, the Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA) Reproductive Health Project has helped the Committee 
achieve its goal. JICA has been integrating the national and district programs 
to effectively upgrade the reproductive health services of the Commune Health 
Center and District Health Center.

PMID: 12322472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Contraception. 1989 Aug;40(2):129-45.

The WHO multicentre trial of the vasopressor effects of combined oral 
contraceptives: 1. Comparisons with IUD. Task Force on Oral Contraceptives. WHO 
Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human 
Reproduction.

[No authors listed]

Changes in blood pressure were measured at three-monthly intervals over one year 
in a prospective study of 704 women using an oral contraceptive (OC) containing 
levonorgestrel 250 ug with ethinyl estradiol 50 ug and 703 women using an 
intrauterine device (IUD). The study was conducted in 11 centres in seven 
developing and three developed countries. Women using OC developed systolic 
blood pressures which were 3.6-5.0 mmHg higher than those using IUDs; their 
diastolic pressures became 1.9-2.7 mm higher. The OC-induced change was not 
affected by climate, age, a family history of hypertension, stroke or heart 
disease or by a history of hypertension in pregnancy. The life-table rate of 
hypertension (BP 140/90 or more) in the first year of OC treatment was 0.6 +/- 
0.4 in the developing countries and 1.1 +/- 0.8 in the developed ones, per 100 
woman-years of use. The vasopressor response to OC varied widely between centres 
but was not obviously related to the economic development of the country.

PMID: 2503294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Ther Umsch. 1991 Apr;48(4):251-7.

[Primary prevention of HIV infection].

[Article in German]

Bauer G(1), Heusser R, Beutter HJ, Steffen R, Gutzwiller F.

Author information:
(1)Institut f√ºr Sozial- und Pr√§ventivmedizin, Universit√§t Z√ºrich.

Primary prophylaxis by a change of behaviour in the population continues to be 
the only effective possibility to prevent a further spread of the aids epidemic. 
The most important presupposition for this is the precise knowledge of the ways 
of transmission and the corresponding protective measures. Informations 
referring to this must turn up repeatedly and above all free of contradictions 
at all levels of the preventive campaign. The desired changes of behaviour 
suppose also a climate of confidence and solidarity. The physician's task of 
prevention is part of the comprehensive strategy of HIV-prevention in 
Switzerland (effect in width and depth on population- and target groups and on 
the individual level). It is naturally the physician's domain to look after and 
counsel individually. Most variable possibilities of beginning a conversation 
about Aids prevention offer themselves to him. He should put the indication for 
this as generous as possible and deal extensively with a possible risky 
behaviour which might not be conscious to both the patient and the physician. 
The HIV antibody test is indicated in certain situations, however the pre- and 
posttest counselling is in any case much more decisive than the result of the 
test. The preventive measures recommended up to now for the most important ways 
of transmission (sexual contact, intravenous drug use, perinatal transmission, 
blood/blood products) are still valid without modification.

PMID: 1858067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Adv Adolesc Mental Health. 1990;4:121-35.

A review of interventions to prevent pregnancy.

Dryfoos JG.

PIP: Of more developed nations, the US is unique in its problem with high rates 
of teen pregnancy. At the heart of our failure to check teen pregnancy may lie 
the country's poor sexual climate, a lack of government commitment, poor health 
system performance, local barriers to the provision of quality sex education, 
and/or lack of access to contraception. Potential solutions to reduce teen 
pregnancy are equally wide-ranging. Programs may aim to provide better and more 
health and sex education, improve decision making skills, improve access to 
contraception and abortion, improve life opportunities as alternatives to 
pregnancies, restructure welfare, and/or encourage youths to refrain from 
premarital sex. This essay presents and discusses major prevention efforts which 
seem to have the highest probability of reducing pregnancy rates, and especially 
childbearing rates among young, unmarried teens. Literature on program 
successes, agency reports, and program observations are reviewed, and include 
programs of sex education and skills enhancement, those helping sexually active 
youths become better contraceptors, and those which offer life option 
alternatives. In the area of improving access to contraception, school-based 
clinics, condom distribution, and other male-oriented programs are covered. 
Major social structural change is, however, called for with a view to promoting 
equity in education, housing, and jobs. Short of such change, interventions may 
target school-based populations, as well as community centers to reach dropouts. 
Early intervention and collaboration to bolster health, social, and recreational 
services for children and adolescents is urged.

PMID: 12317625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Lancet. 1994 Mar 19;343(8899):714-8. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(94)91586-5.

Climatic warming and increased malaria incidence in Rwanda.

Loevinsohn ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences Agronomiques du Rwanda and Applied Ecology Consultants, 
Butare, Rwanda.

Global climatic change is expected to increase the incidence of vector-borne 
diseases, especially malaria. This study assessed the contribution of climate to 
a malaria epidemic in Rwanda, focusing on the catchment area of one health 
centre where diagnosis was consistent and non-climatic variables well monitored. 
In late 1987 malaria incidence in the area increased by 337% over the 3 previous 
years. The increase was greatest in groups with little acquired 
immunity--children under 2 years (564%) and people in high-altitude areas 
(501%). Case-fatality rose significantly (relative risk = 4.85, p < 0.001). 1987 
also saw record high temperatures and rainfall. An autoregressive equation 
including lagged effects of these two variables explained 80% of the variance in 
monthly malaria incidence. Temperature (especially mean minimum) predicted 
incidence best at higher altitudes where malaria had increased most. Empirically 
derived relations were consistent with the estimated generation time of the 
disease and with the known sensitivity of the plasmodium parasite to 
temperature. The patterns of climatic warming between day and night and among 
seasons will be critical to the effect on malaria. These findings are most 
relevant to regions near the altitude or latitude limits of the disease, where 
several epidemics have lately been reported.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(94)91586-5
PMID: 7907685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Popul Bull UN. 1993;(34-35):19-34.

Expert Group Meeting on Population, Environment and Development.

[No authors listed]

PIP: As part of the preparation for the up-coming International Conference on 
Population and Development, an expert group met at UN headquarters on January 
20-24, 1992. The group noted that the momentum of population growth was expected 
to add 3 billion people to the global population between 1985 and 2025, with 
more than 90% of the growth occurring in the developing countries which are 
least able to respond to the attendant resource and environmental demands. The 
expert group discussed the interaction of population and resources, specifically 
the impact of population growth on the environment and carrying capacity. The 
meeting then focused on environmental discontinuities and uncertainties and on 
environmental degradation, specifically the loss of agricultural land, the 
destruction of tropical forests, fresh-water resource, the loss of biological 
diversify, and climate change. Following their deliberations, the expert group 
drafted 18 recommendations addressed to governments, social institutions, and 
international organizations. The group urged that governments establish or 
strengthen the integration of environmental and population concerns into 
development policy-making and planning and support technologies to achieve 
sustained economic growth and development while striving to replace the use of 
fossil fuels with renewable resources. Areas of the environment subject to acute 
population pressure should be identified and policies devised to reduce that 
pressure. Ecologically helpful labor-intensive projects should be implemented 
for their dual benefits. Women should be included in these activities, and their 
status in society, therefore, should be improved through improved education and 
participatory opportunities. The uses of water should be optimized to 
acknowledge its scarcity. The delivery of service to alleviate poverty should 
proceed in a manner that invites community participation, which, along with 
education, will be vital to institute these changes. Adequate resources for 
urban management should be allocated to local authorities. Environmentally 
displaced people should receive assistance while the cause of their uprooting is 
simultaneously addressed. Land-use planning and promotion of emergency 
prevention is increasingly important as populations settle in areas vulnerable 
to natural disasters. International organizations are urged to support efforts 
to minimize the health impacts of environmental degradation and increase their 
assistance in the areas of population, sustainable development, and the 
environment, especially in training and national planning. Awareness of the 
interrelatedness of these issues should be promoted in every way possible, 
especially through education, training, and the support of databases. 
Policy-oriented research should focus on identifying critically endangered 
areas. As policies are devised for sustainable development, special attention 
should be paid to improving the circumstances of indigenous people, and their 
accumulated experience with sustainable development should be sought and used. 
Finally, conflicting goals between countries should be identified by governments 
to allow open analysis, successful negotiation, and satisfactory solutions.

PMID: 12287713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Environ Change Secur Proj Rep. 1998 Spring;(4):5-15.

The role of environmental degradation in population displacement.

Lonergan S.

PIP: This article answers a series of questions about the role of environmental 
degradation in population displacement, refugee movement, and migration. The 
environment tends not to be included in the reasons for migration. Roger's 
indicators of migration potential include population growth, economic 
restructuring, increased economic disparities, and increased refugee flows. 
Myers (1993) estimated that international displacement and internal displacement 
may amount to about 25 million and may rise to 150 million by 2050. The role of 
the environment in displacement must be examined in the broader political and 
cultural context. Definitions of environmental refugees are ambiguous and 
inconsistent, and research has not answered why people continue to move to 
Mexico City and Chongqing, China, which both have very high levels of pollution. 
El-Hinnawi (1985) defined 3 groups of environmental refugees: those displaced 
due to natural disasters; those displaced due to permanent habitat changes; and 
those displaced who migrated from areas that cannot support their basic needs 
and who desire an improved quality of life. Lonergan (1994) identified 
environmental stresses as natural disasters, cumulative or slow-onset changes, 
accidental disruptions or industrial accidents, development projects, and 
conflict and warfare. These 5 causes must be treated separately and not lumped 
together as environmental degradation. Shoreline erosion, coastal flooding, and 
agricultural disruption associated with climate change may increase migration. 
Global measures must address world poverty and promote sustainable development.

PMID: 12321719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Ann Ig. 1989 Sep-Oct;1(5):983-99.

[Surveillance of health status in an agrarian environment: proposal for a 
method. 1. Epidemiological data].

[Article in Italian]

Orecchio F, Maggiore A, De Lucia MG, Ficarra MG, Dal Mas A, Miglietta S, Villa 
P, Stacchini F.

In order to evaluate the risk of the exposure of the pesticides and N-nitroso 
compounds in the agricultural environment not only farm-hands have to be 
considered but also their families. So it is necessary to prepare survey 
methodologies to examine the state of health of all individuals who are exposed 
to same kind of risk (pesticides and nitroso compounds), even if in different 
ways and intensity. We have therefore chosen four farms situated on the same 
territory which cultivate vegetables. Three, of these farms, made wide use of 
pesticides and fertilizers, the fourth one was used as a "control farm" because 
it did not employ any chemicals. For every farm data about the neighbouring 
territory, the climate, the kind of cultivation, the pesticides and other 
employed chemicals were collected. Every subject (in all 25) residing in the 
farm was interviewed with a standard questionnaire about personal data, the 
duties performed on the farm, the way in which chemicals were used, their 
medical history as well as the life style. Samples of blood were drawn 
periodically in different seasons, over a two year period, to determine both 
nitrosoamine (NA) and the enzymes which reveal hepatic damage: Alkaline 
phosphatase (ALP), Leucinoaminopeptidase (LAP), Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) 
and Acetylcholinesterase (Ach). We have observed that: a. the most frequent 
pathologies concern skin (16% of the people) and liver (12% of the people), 
which are favourite targets for agricultural chemicals though the serum enzymes 
did not show any important change; b. 8% of the subjects had acute pesticide 
poisoning; we therefore observed neither particular precautionary safety 
measures, nor a particular knowledge of acute and chronic toxic effects 
depending on the use of pesticides. So we suggest: 1) that the Sanitary 
Authorities control the state of health not only of the farm-hands but also of 
their families, if exposed to risk; this can be realized through the strict 
collaboration of the Occupational Physician and the Family doctor; 2) capillary 
action of health education regarding agricultural risks; 3) to increase research 
to find more sensitive and efficient biological indicators in order to evaluate 
the hazards of agricultural chemicals.

PMID: 2483917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Behav Med. 2000 Spring;26(1):14-22. doi: 10.1080/08964280009595749.

An organizational climate intervention associated with increased handwashing and 
decreased nosocomial infections.

Larson EL(1), Early E, Cloonan P, Sugrue S, Parides M.

Author information:
(1)Georgetown University School of Nursing, Washington, DC, USA. 
ELL23@columbia.edu

Handwashing practices are persistently suboptimal among healthcare professionals 
and are also stubbornly resistant to change. The purpose of this 
quasi-experimental intervention trial was to assess the impact of an 
intervention to change organizational culture on frequency of staff handwashing 
(as measured by counting devices inserted into soap dispensers on four critical 
care units) and nosocomial infections associated with methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE). All 
staff in one of two hospitals in the mid-Atlantic region received an 
intervention with multiple components designed to change organizational culture; 
the second hospital served as a comparison. Over a period of 8 months, 860,567 
soap dispensings were recorded, with significant improvements in the study 
hospital after 6 months of follow-up. Rates of MRSA were not significantly 
different between the two hospitals, but rates of VRE were significantly reduced 
in the intervention hospital during implementation.

DOI: 10.1080/08964280009595749
PMID: 10971880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Am Health Policy. 1992 Jan-Feb;2(1):44-8.

Bound and gagged: America's family planning network.

Dryfoos JG.

During the past decade, the number of family planning clinics receiving support 
from the federal government has fallen from 5,000 to 4,000 despite a growing 
demand for their services among poor women and teenagers. At the same time, 
family planning providers have been under regulatory attack, forced to fend off 
a "squeal rule" aimed at teenagers and to stop a "gag rule" preventing abortion 
referral. With the climate in Washington unlikely to change, family planners 
should consider integrating other services into their network or press to 
include family planning in other care networks. A new national commission could 
help break the logjam on federal legislation.

PIP: 4000 family planning (FP) clinics in the US serve about 5 million women 
each year most of whom are poor. They provide FP as well as screening services 
for hypertension, breast and cervical cancer, sexually transmitted diseases 
(STDs), pelvic exams, and urine tests. Even though they are the most important 
means of health care for these women, the US public knows little about them. The 
main reason for this disinterest is Americans' ambivalence about sex. The 
abortion issue has clouded FP. Mass media, policymakers, and politicians do not 
distinguish between FP and abortion. Yet few FP clinics do abortion. Public FP 
funds have never been used to do abortions. Many conservatives believe that FP 
services for teenagers promotes premarital sex, but most teenagers have been 
sexually active for at least a year before coming to FP clinics. Conservatives 
think the only way to stem adolescent pregnancy is abstinence, but 75% of all 
teenagers have had premarital intercourse before the end of their senior year. 
Some antiabortion groups harass FP providers because of their association with 
sexuality. The Reagan administration cut so much funding that 20% of FP clinics 
had to close. Yet demand for their services increased. US contraceptive 
services' expenditures decreased 66% during the 1980s. The Bush administration 
forbade FP workers at federally funded clinics from counseling clients about 
abortion. This restriction allowed the government to define the 
physician-patient relationship. Some FP clinics may give up federal funding so 
they can provide patients complete information and services. Some advocates 
suggest comprehensive reproductive health care centers that integrate FP and 
pre- and postnatal care while others suggest integrating FP with AIDS 
prevention, substance abuse, STD services, and maternal and child health care.

PMID: 10116482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Health Care Manag (Frederick). 2000 Dec;19(2):1-7. doi: 
10.1097/00126450-200019020-00002.

Stakeholder management in a hyperturbulent health care environment.

Rotarius T(1), Liberman A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Professions, University of Central Florida, Orlando, 
Florida, USA.

The fast-paced change in today's health care environment presents an unsettling 
organizational climate within which managers must make important decisions that 
affect key stakeholders. This ambiguousness has resulted in the proliferation of 
health care organizations that are bundling together to find a sense of 
environmental stability in which they can achieve common goals. This means that 
health care managers need to view stakeholders as parts of larger bundles rather 
than only as individual organizations.

DOI: 10.1097/00126450-200019020-00002
PMID: 11146870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Qual Assur. 1998 Jan-Mar;6(1):13-22. doi: 10.1080/105294198277933.

Maintaining the habitable condition of the planet: balancing technological and 
ecosystem services.

Cairns J Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, USA. 
Cairnsb@vt.edu

Infinite growth cannot continue on a finite planet. One reason is that human 
society is dependent on a life-support system that is both technological and 
ecological. Ecosystem services (including regeneration of topsoil, maintenance 
of atmospheric gas balance, cleansing of water, and maintenance of a genetic 
library to meet climate changes, whether induced by humans or by nature) are 
provided by nature. In meeting the perceived needs of human society, the ability 
of the ecological life-support system to deliver services may be compromised. To 
prevent this, human society will have to undergo major changes in behavior. 
Change will be facilitated if a common sustainability paradigm is accepted to 
meet certain conditions and goals. The main goal is to provide human descendants 
with a habitable planet, and this entails protecting natural systems that 
provide necessary life-support functions. If this goal is accepted, then a 
number of supporting goals can be stated and the conditions necessary to meet 
these goals can be outlined.

DOI: 10.1080/105294198277933
PMID: 9890134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Hosp Health Netw. 1995 Aug 20;69(16):38-40.

Choose your tomorrow.

Hudson T.

In this climate of rapid change, hospitals need to be ready for anything. 
Scenario-based planning, a tool other industries swear by, could help. The 
process involves coming up with a handful of likely contingencies and then 
inventing strategies to react to those potential tomorrows.

PMID: 7640709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 1996 May-Jun;70(3):251-9.

[Metereology and health. The relationship between environmental temperature and 
mortality].

[Article in Spanish]

Ballester D√≠ez F(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Valenciano de Estudios en Salud P√∫blica, Valencia.

The results are presented of a series of recent works which analyse the 
relationships between meteorological phenomena, especially the temperature, and 
mortality. An increase in mortality in winter, is a well-known phenomenon which 
has been examined in many countries. The most common cause of death due to 
temperature changes is illness affecting the breathing apparatus and circulation 
system. The form and magnitude of the relationship between mortality and 
temperature depends on a series of factors, which include the characteristics of 
the population and the study zone. Not only the cold, but also "heat waves", 
have been associated with an increase in the mortality rate. The results of 
several works referred to suggest that the relationship between the atmospheric 
temperature and mortality take the for of a "V", with the lowest rates occurring 
on days when the average temperature is between 16 degrees and 28 degrees, 
depending on the climate in the zone being studied. An important aspect to be 
taken into account, is the delayed effect of the variations in temperature upon 
mortality. This work also refers to the role that other meteorological factors 
such as dampness and wind might play with regard to health. Finally, 
consideration is given to the potential impact on health, of temperature 
increases owing to climatic change.

PMID: 9005028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Integration. 1998 Summer;(56):13.

Impressive work. No one is better than the PVO community at working at the 
grassroots level.

Babbitt HC.

PIP: This article summarizes a speech given by the Deputy Administrator of the 
USAID at the US and Japan Common Agenda Open Forum in Tokyo in April 1997. The 
report of working groups indicates future actions on population and health and 
environment and food security. A major goal for 1998 is to strengthen the 
bilateral alliance that includes private voluntary organizations (PVOs). PVOs 
have been extraordinarily successful in promoting stable development with 
dedication and emotional commitment. PVOs are adept at working at the grassroots 
levels with flexible and innovative strategies. The speaker referred to 
successful efforts in Ethiopia, Eritrea, and Mozambique, to improve health and 
support democratic transitions. The US and Japan agreed over the 3 days of 
meetings to several areas that PVOs can become involved in: Japan's child 
survival program, the US-Japan collaboration on conservation of natural 
resources and biodiversity, and global climate change. The recent Civil Society 
workshop in Washington, DC, led to collaborations between government and 
nongovernmental organizations on democratization efforts. USAID has identified 
some areas for PVO involvement. The US's Overseas Development Assistance agency 
recommended 3 actions for the Common Agenda: increasing the number of joint 
implementation missions, using the synergy in joint relations in developing 
countries, and expanding grassroots programs into larger programs that have 
national and global impact. Despite budget constraints, there is a concerted 
effort to improve aid levels.

PMID: 12294057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Int J Health Serv. 1994;24(3):477-94. doi: 10.2190/JWRX-03E0-V12G-4BBY.

The politics of pharmaceutical reform: the case of the Philippine National Drug 
Policy.

Lee MB.

A national drug policy was formulated in the Philippines after the rise of the 
Aquino government in 1986. In this article, the author discusses the 
pharmaceutical situation before the policy was announced, and argues that the 
major push for a policy came from the confluence of four factors: a change in 
the structures of political power, especially the rise of a new government and 
the empowerment of health non-governmental organizations as new participants in 
the policy process; members of the Department of Health who pushed for a policy; 
a more conductive social and political climate, both locally and 
internationally; and a growing body of knowledge about the drug issue. The 
author discusses the policy's achievements as well as the limitations that have 
beset the policy from 1987 to 1992.

DOI: 10.2190/JWRX-03E0-V12G-4BBY
PMID: 7928014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Risk Anal. 2000 Dec;20(6):851-60. doi: 10.1111/0272-4332.206078.

Equity, efficiency, uncertainty, and the mitigation of global climate change.

Hammitt JK(1), Harvey CM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Risk Analysis, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA. james_hammitt@harvard.edu

Policies to mitigate potential damages from global climate change impose costs 
on the current generation to provide benefits to future generations. This 
article examines how comparisons among three stylized 
policies-business-as-usual, mitigation of climate change, and compensation for 
climate damages-depend on social preferences with respect to risk and 
intertemporal equity. Also examined is the opportunity-cost criterion, which 
asserts that mitigation should not be chosen if its net present value is smaller 
than that of business-as-usual. Analysis reveals that the discount factor used 
to evaluate whether mitigation satisfies this criterion depends on preferences 
regarding risk and intertemporal inequality of consumption, and on the risk of 
the compensation policy. Risk aversion favors mitigation over business-as-usual. 
If society is neutral to inequality, risk aversion disfavors compensation, but 
if society is inequality averse, the effect of risk aversion on preferences 
between compensation and business-as-usual is ambiguous. Inequality aversion 
tends to favor business-as-usual over both alternative policies provided that, 
roughly speaking, the anticipated future improvements in welfare exceed the 
anticipated climate damages.

DOI: 10.1111/0272-4332.206078
PMID: 11314734


199. J Contin Educ Nurs. 1989 May-Jun;20(3):112-6.

Creating a climate for the implementation of a nursing conceptual framework.

Rogers ME.

Over the last decade, increasing numbers of service and educational institutions 
have initiated plans to implement a nursing conceptual framework to guide 
practice, education, administration, and research. Regardless of the conceptual 
framework being implemented, for effective change to occur, considerable 
attention must be paid to the nature of the learning process experienced by 
individual nurses. In this article, adult learning theory is discussed as it 
relates to the process of learning a nursing conceptual framework.

PMID: 2498404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Ter Arkh. 1987;59(4):112-5.

[Effect of the climate of the Anapa health resort on the effectiveness of 
treatment of chronic aspecific lung diseases in adolescents].

[Article in Russian]

Kholopov AP, Khristoforov SN, Rebrin VM.

The results of examination of 2144 adolescents with bronchial asthma and chronic 
bronchitis coming to the health resort area of the Black Sea coast of the 
Caucasus from various regions of the USSR showed a significant effect of the 
climatic and weather factors on the efficacy of sanatorium treatment. Change of 
climatic zones resulted in the reduction of therapeutic efficacy due to 
dysadaptation reactions of the body necessitating stricter indications for a 
differentiated selection of adolescents coming from contrast climatic zones of 
the Urals, Siberia and the Far East.

PMID: 3589987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Health Libr Rev. 1995 Sep;12(3):159-72. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2532.1995.1230159.x.

Using evaluation research methods to improve quality.

Marshall JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Information Studies, University of Toronto, Canada.

The idea of evaluation, or the measurement of a person, a service or a programme 
against some type of yardstick, has been around for a long time. In everyday 
language, the term evaluation is used to refer to everything from employee 
performance appraisal, to informal opinions about whether a particular service 
appears to be working well, to carefully planned and executed programmes of 
evaluation. In the past, librarians have tended to rely on their own 
professional judgement as a primary means of informal evaluation, and as long as 
the librarian was considered competent by others in the organization, this 
method seemed to work reasonably well. In the rapidly changing fiscal climate of 
the 1990s, greater demands for accountability are altering the standards of 
evaluation, and informal methods based on professional judgement are less and 
less likely to be seen as adequate. Formal evaluation is becoming even more 
important as management strategies, such as total quality management (TQM) and 
continuous quality improvement (CQI), are adopted--strategies that rely on 
gathering and using data for measuring service quality. Although programme 
jargon such as TQM and CQI may change in the future, it is likely that the 
evaluation process inherent in these approaches will continue to be an important 
management tool for deciding on the allocation of scarce resources.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2532.1995.1230159.x
PMID: 10159234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Med Staff Couns. 1989 Spring;3(2):1-6.

Rights of the medical staff in the transfer of hospital ownership.

Chenen AR, Kalifon D.

In the current uncertain economic climate, a greater number of hospitals than 
ever before are changing ownership through sale or merger. This article explores 
the legal implications of a change in hospital ownership for both the individual 
medical staff physicians and the medical staff organization. The article takes 
the position that, with respect to individual physicians, their vested rights in 
staff membership and clinical privileges cannot be altered simply because of a 
change in hospital ownership. In addition, with respect to the medical staff 
organization, the medical staff bylaws contract remains intact and, therefore, a 
change in hospital ownership does not permit the new hospital owners to make 
wholesale changes in the medical staff organization.

PMID: 10292417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Arerugi. 1996 Dec;45(12):1270-6.

[Effects of global climate change on Japanese cedar pollen concentration in 
air--estimated results obtained from Yamagata City and its surrounding area].

[Article in Japanese]

Takahashi Y(1), Kawashima S, Aikawa S.

Author information:
(1)Yamagata Prefectural Institute of Public Health.

The effects of global warming on Japanese cedar pollen concentration in air were 
examined. There was a significant increase in total pollen count in years where 
small or average values of pollen dispersion were observed and where summertime 
temperatures were postulated to have risen from 2 to 5 degrees C. There were no 
remarkable differences in total pollen count in years where large values of 
pollen dispersion were observed. On the other hand, a drastic decrease in total 
pollen count was expected when summertime temperatures were postulated to have 
dropped from 2 to 5 degrees C. A major factor controlled the value of total 
pollen count was examined by use of a simulation method of airborne Cryptomeria 
japonica pollen. The values of total pollen count mainly controlled by the 
amount of male flower at basins and in Japanese cedar forested areas, and the 
manner in which plains isolated from pollen sources are considered in part to be 
subjected to meteorological conditions. The difference of initiation time of the 
pollen season has no great influence on the values of total pollen count.

PMID: 9133338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Pak Econ Soc Rev. 1979;17(3-4):1-62.

Pakistan's pattern of development and prospects.

Baqui M.

PIP: This paper analyzes past and present development experiences in Pakistan, 
and gives indications of possible directions for future development. Since 1969 
there has been an open dissatisfaction with economic management from the 
government, which has resulted in a drying up of private investment. However, 
this drawback was partly balanced by a rapid increase in income received by 
Pakistanis working abroad, particularly in the Middle East. There have been 
slight increases in growth in agriculture, industry, and in the service sector, 
such as banking, insurance, and shipping. The growth of per capita income, 
however, is constantly offset by the acceleration in population growth, which 
has reached 3% a year. Literacy rate is still 19% of the total population, and 
basic health facilities cover only 50% of the population, while potable water 
supply is available to 11.2% of the rural population. Possible development 
directions would include the denationalization of some industries, and the 
creation of competition between the private and public sectors, so to improve 
the climate for private investment. Water availability for land irrigation 
should be expanded, and mineral fields better surveyed and exploited. Pakistan 
should develop the possibility of growing trade offered by its geographical 
location, improve all kinds of social services, including family planning, 
education, and health services, and provide the means to produce energy for all 
the prospected programs.

PMID: 12261814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Trop Med Int Health. 2000 Apr;5(4):263-74. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-3156.2000.00551.x.

Land use change alters malaria transmission parameters by modifying temperature 
in a highland area of Uganda.

Lindblade KA(1), Walker ED, Onapa AW, Katungu J, Wilson ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.

As highland regions of Africa historically have been considered free of malaria, 
recent epidemics in these areas have raised concerns that high elevation malaria 
transmission may be increasing. Hypotheses about the reasons for this include 
changes in climate, land use and demographic patterns. We investigated the 
effect of land use change on malaria transmission in the south-western highlands 
of Uganda. From December 1997 to July 1998, we compared mosquito density, biting 
rates, sporozoite rates and entomological inoculation rates between 8 villages 
located along natural papyrus swamps and 8 villages located along swamps that 
have been drained and cultivated. Since vegetation changes affect 
evapotranspiration patterns and, thus, local climate, we also investigated 
differences in temperature, humidity and saturation deficit between natural and 
cultivated swamps. We found that on average all malaria indices were higher near 
cultivated swamps, although differences between cultivated and natural swamps 
were not statistically significant. However, maximum and minimum temperature 
were significantly higher in communities bordering cultivated swamps. In 
multivariate analysis using a generalized estimating equation approach to 
Poisson regression, the average minimum temperature of a village was 
significantly associated with the number of Anopheles gambiae s.l. per house 
after adjustment for potential confounding variables. It appears that 
replacement of natural swamp vegetation with agricultural crops has led to 
increased temperatures, which may be responsible for elevated malaria 
transmission risk in cultivated areas.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3156.2000.00551.x
PMID: 10810021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Can Nurse. 1994 Feb;90(2):40-4.

[Support for parents with anorexic children].

[Article in French]

Salette H.

When a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa is reported to parents of older 
adolescents, those living in the midst of crisis may be unable to follow 
behavior-change directions demanded by their child's health. At times like this, 
a support group of parents can complement health professionals' interventions. 
This article examines a pilot project, based in a large pediatric hospital, that 
tried to demonstrate the efficacy of such a parent support group. Eight 
90-minute weekly meetings were held on four basic themes. And 13 parents made a 
point of attending them all. Among the benefits: creation of a climate of 
respect between anorexic adolescents and their parents; increased parental 
knowledge of anorexia nervosa; and the discovery of new aspects of the 
parent-child relationship.

PMID: 8194034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Health Care Superv. 1996 Jun;14(4):11-8.

Creating an organizational climate for multiculturalism.

Bruhn JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Penn State Harrisburg, Middletown, PA, USA.

Multiculturism is an ideal goal for our society, its organizations, and its 
institutions, involving a continuous process of education and change within 
organizations. Multiculturalism begins with diversity and requires various steps 
to achieve changes in attitudes, behaviors, and values. The leadership of 
organizations must not only commit to diversification, but they must participate 
in it and reward its efforts. Diversification should be managed by creating a 
climate of open participation, feedback, and control at the lower organizational 
levels. To micromanage the process of becoming diverse increases resistance and 
paranoia and counters educational efforts.

PMID: 10157003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Clin Nurse Spec. 1987 Fall;1(3):133-9.

The role of the clinical nurse specialist consultant in organizational 
development.

McDougall GJ.

Complex health care organizations must remain flexible in order to adapt to 
current needs of the social and economic environment. This paper discusses the 
value of a clinical nurse specialist (CNS) service as an internal consultant to 
promote planned change within an organization through the specific role of an 
organizational development (OD) consultant. As an OD consultant, the CNS may 
implement planned change by focusing on many structural levels: individual, 
interpersonal, team or group, intergroup, and total organization. Some types of 
problems requiting intervention are: role definition: conflict versus 
cooperation; decision making; problem solving; leadership and authority; culture 
and climate; communication; and goals and plans. These problems are analyzed 
with examples of specific OD interventions implemented by a CNS.

PMCID: PMC6491352
PMID: 3651969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Int J Sports Med. 1992 Oct;13 Suppl 1:S172-6. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-1024630.

The different types of general cold adaptation in man.

Bittel J(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherches du Service de Sante des Armees, Unit√© de 
Thermophysiologie et de Bio√©nerg√©tique et Environnement, La Tronche, France.

Different types of general cold adaptation have been described over the last 50 
years. Metabolic adaptation (Alacaluf Indians, Arctic Indians Eskimos), 
insulative adaptation (coastal Aborigines of tropical northern Australia), 
hypothermic adaptation (bushmen of the Kalahari desert, Peruvian Indians) and 
insulative hypothermic adaptation (Central Australian Aborigines, nomadic Lapps, 
Korean and Japanese diving women). These different types of cold adaptation are 
related to the intensity of the cold stress and to individual factors such as 
diet, the level of physical fitness and body fat content. Thus, in natural 
environments, man develops a strategy of adaptation to cold, which takes into 
account environmental and individual factors. This strategy is susceptible to be 
modified when these conditions change. Caloric intake deficit could have been 
responsible for the hypothermic adaptation observed after J.-L. Etienne's 
journey to the North Pole. Physiological responses were adapted to maintain an 
acceptable level of energetic reserves with a moderate hypothermia, which was 
not life threatening for the climatic conditions encountered by the polar 
explorer.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-1024630
PMID: 1483765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Sch Health. 1975 Oct;45(8):455-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1746-1561.1975.tb04519.x.

The effect of the teachers smoking behavior on their involvement in smoking 
education in the schools.

Chen TL, Rakip WR.

The smoking behavior and attitudes of public school teachers were studied to 
determine if the teachers' smoking behavior is related to their attitudes and 
behavior regarding students' smoking practice and smoking education in schools. 
The Northampton, Massachusetts, School System was studied, where 162 of the 194 
teachers randomly selected from various schools in the district completed the 
close-ended questionnaires administered and collected by the researcher. The 
study yielded a return rate of 83 percent. The results of the study showed that 
the general climate in school is one conducive to the establishment of a 
comprehensive smoking education program. It also indicates that the teachers' 
attitudes and behavior towards smoking education were closely related to their 
smoking behavior. The ex-smokers were the most active group in attempting to 
initiate student smoking behavior change, while the smoking teachers were the 
least active in this respect. Furthermore, pre-service and in-service teacher 
training programs in relation to smoking education were shown to be extremely 
sparse and ineffective in the past. This study suggests the need to strengthen 
pre-service and in-service teacher training programs in smoking education and to 
make smoking cessation programs available to those teacher who want to stop 
smoking.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1746-1561.1975.tb04519.x
PMID: 1041753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Popul Bull. 1985 Feb;40(1):1-46.

Sub-Saharan Africa: population pressures on development.

Goliber TJ.

PIP: The population of sub-Saharan Africa, estimated at 434 million in 1984, is 
expected to reach 1.4 billion by 2025. The birth rate, currently 48/1000 
population, continues to increase, and the death rate, 17/1000, is declining. 
Rapid population growth has curtailed government efforts to provide adequate 
nutrition, preserve the land base essential for future development, meet the 
demand for jobs, education, and health services, and address overcrowding in 
urban areas. Low education, rural residence, and low incomes are key 
contributors to the area's high fertility. Other factors include women's 
restricted roles, early age at marriage, a need for children as a source of 
security and support in old age, and limited knowledge of and access to modern 
methods of contraception. Average desired family size, which is higher than 
actual family size in most countries, is 6-9 children. Although government 
leaders have expressed ambivalence toward development of population policies and 
family planning programs as a result of the identification of such programs with 
Western aid donors, the policy climat is gradually changing. By mid-1984, at 
least 13 of the 42 countries in the region had indicated that they consider 
current fertility rates too high and support government and/or private family 
planning programs to reduce fertility. In addition, 26 countries in the region 
provide some government family planning services, usually integrated with 
maternal and child health programs. However, 10 countries in the region do not 
support family planning services for any reason. Unfortunately, sub-Saharan 
Africa has not yet produced a family planning program with a measurable effect 
on fertility that could serve as a model for other countries in the region. 
Social and economic change is central to any hope of fertility reduction in 
sub-Saharan Africa. Lower infant and child mortality rates, rising incomes, 
higher education, greater economic and social opportunities for women, and 
increased security would provide a climate more conducive to fertility decline. 
Given the limited demand, great sensitivity must be shown in implementing family 
planning programs.

PMID: 12266940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Br J Orthod. 1998 Feb;25(1):78-81. doi: 10.1093/ortho/25.1.78.

Orthodontic postgraduate training in Germany--have we anything to learn?

Luther F(1), Cook PA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Dental Health, Leeds Dental Institute, U.K.

In 1996, the authors were able to visit the University Orthodontic Unit in 
Marburg, Germany. Author FL was able to undertake the visit as part of a 
discretionary secondment for specialist training and this article describes the 
author's (FL) experience of orthodontic, postgraduate training there, and 
highlights differences between training in the U.K. and Germany. In the current 
climate of change with regard to specialist training, it seemed timely to 
investigate how training occurs elsewhere in Europe.

DOI: 10.1093/ortho/25.1.78
PMID: 9547981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Science. 1993 Jun 4;260(5113):1472-81. doi: 10.1126/science.260.5113.1472.

Atmosphere-surface exchange measurements.

Dabberdt WF, Lenschow DH, Horst TW, Zimmerman PR, Oncley SP, Delany AC.

The exchange of various trace species and energy at the earth's surface plays an 
important role in climate, ecology, and human health and welfare. Surface 
exchange measurements can be difficult to obtain yet are important to understand 
physical processes, assess environmental and global change impacts, and develop 
robust parameterizations of atmospheric processes. The physics and turbulent 
structure of the atmospheric boundary layer are reviewed as they contribute to 
dry surface exchange rates (fluxes). Micrometeorological, budget, and enclosure 
techniques used to measure or estimate surface fluxes are described, along with 
their respective advantages and limitations. Various measurement issues (such as 
site characteristics, sampling considerations, sensor attributes, and flow 
distortion) impact on the ability to obtain representative surface-based and 
airborne flux data.

DOI: 10.1126/science.260.5113.1472
PMID: 17739803


214. Time. 1977 Apr 4;109(14):38-9.

The issue that inflamed India.

[No authors listed]

PIP: The 1 issue, more than anything else, that cost Indira Gandhi the election 
in India was her mass sterilization campaign. Although no one questions India's 
need for an effective family planning program, the government's program to 
vasectomize millions of Indian men who had fathered 2 or more children was 
ruthlessly and often illegally applied and came to symbolize the dangers of 
authoritarian rule. The program's target was 4.3 million sterilizations; the 
campaign produced 7.8 million between April 1976 and January 1977. In an effort 
to ensure the program's success, the government censors prohibited newspapers 
from publishing any criticism of family planning. 6 months ago the Family 
Planning Council claimed that "a most favorable climate" has been created for 
the voluntary acceptance of sterilization. In a recent tour of the Indian 
countryside this claim was found to be untrue. None of the villagers this writer 
spoke to had been offered any guidance by a family planning worker. There had 
been no explanation, for example, that sterilization is not responsible for 
impotence. By last week when the votes were counted, the pattern was clear. In 
states where the sterilization program had been pursued with the most zeal but 
the least preparation, the defection from the Congress Party was the most 
severe.

PMID: 11662377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Prog Rep Health Dev South Afr. 1993 Winter:46-52.

Hlatlolanang: a community project.

Stober P.

PIP: Sekekhuneland, which is in the northern Transvaal in South Africa, has 
suffered from a 2-year drought which has led to a shortage of basic food in the 
villages and a 50-60% incidence of kwashiorkor among the village children. The 
natural resources of the area have been eliminated by over population and its 
attendant deforestation, land erosion, and wildlife decimation. The situation 
has been exacerbated by a political climate rife with corruption and 
incompetence. The most pressing problem is a shortage of water which prevents 
agricultural development and limits food production. Some dangerous traditional 
beliefs persist, such as believing that sickness is caused by curses which 
modern medicine cannot affect. In response to this situation, Hlatlolanang ("we 
share the burden"), a community-based development program has been put into 
place. The director of the center, Rose Mazibuko, is a nurse who believes that 
primary health care in its broadest sense is a human right. This involves not 
only the health sector but also agriculture, industrial development, education, 
housing, and public works. The first problem tackled was kwashiorkor. Other 
groups had failed to reduce the incidence of the condition in the area. 
Hlatlolanang recognized that mothers of affected children were being stigmatized 
by hospital personnel. Thus, the mothers would often go to the hospital only as 
a last resort and would avoid the training necessary to help their children. The 
community requested that Hlatlolanang become a training center where all members 
of the community could learn how to combat kwashiorkor and where inappropriate 
attitudes could undergo the necessary changes. Thus, the Hlatlolanang Health and 
Education Center was born with funding from the Kaiser Family Foundation, an 
architect who participated in the development workshop and knew exactly what the 
community wanted, an elected planning committee, and 4 local builders. People 
were carefully screened and hired to run the center according to a deliberately 
slow selection process which gave those employed time to acquire the necessary 
training for development work. Since the main objective of Hlatlolanang is to 
instill self-reliance in the communities it intends to serve, its programs are 
only put in place at community request and with the compliance and understanding 
of the local chiefs. Hlatlolanang is willing both to help and to work with 
anyone, a willingness which allows the group to avoid regional and village 
politics. Development work is slow, but gardens have been planted and hope has 
started to grow in the people.

PMID: 12345440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Sports Sci. 1994 Jun;12(3):251-4. doi: 10.1080/02640419408732170.

Dietary intake and body physique in adolescent cross-country skiers.

Par√≠zkov√° J(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Health Promotion, VIth Clinic of Internal Medicine, 1st Medical 
School, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.

Sixteen adolescent cross-country skiers (6 males, 10 females) were assessed 
during a period of preparation carried out in the school year (period I) and 
during a period of training in the mountains before competition (period II). 
Body mass index (BMI), body composition (calculated from skinfolds) and dietary 
intake were ascertained over a 1 week period. The boys had the highest BMI and 
the lowest percentage of body fat when compared to controls and other athletic 
boys of comparable age. Their energy and protein intake (especially during 
period II) were also above the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) and above 
that of controls and other athletic boys of comparable age. The girls had a 
lower body fat percentage and BMI than untrained girls, and also elevated energy 
and protein intakes when compared to the RDA. The intake of energy, protein, 
fat, carbohydrate and micronutrients increased significantly during period II as 
compared to period I. An adequate energy balance was assumed as BMI and body fat 
did not change significantly during period II. Greater calcium intake during 
periods I and II, and a lower intake of iron during period I, when compared to 
the RDA, were observed in the girls. Thus, with the exception of micronutrients, 
which ought to be carefully monitored, the spontaneously regulated food intake 
was assumed to be adequate during changes in the intensity of training and 
climate in adolescent cross-country skiers.

DOI: 10.1080/02640419408732170
PMID: 8064971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Vet Q. 1993 Jun;15(2):43-7. doi: 10.1080/01652176.1993.9694370.

The present and future veterinary practitioners in the tropics.

Schillhorn van Veen TW.

The tropical countries' inability to maintain veterinary services in the realm 
of the state as well as the improved quality of privately provided animal health 
services are leading to a change in the role, and type, of veterinarians in most 
of the tropics. Although control of epizootics diseases will continue to be 
important, further attention has to be given to the equally important 
nutritional deficiencies and management related diseases. These changes will 
have implications for the position of veterinarians as well as for animal health 
related research and training. The present overproduction of veterinarians in 
some tropical and subtropical countries can not be absorbed in private practice, 
especially in view of the continuing role of animal health technicians and lay 
personnel in disease control.

DOI: 10.1080/01652176.1993.9694370
PMID: 8372421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Schweiz Rundsch Med Prax. 1992 Mar 31;81(14):436-41.

[Human adaptation to climatic changes].

[Article in German]

Weihe WH.

The causes for the currently predicted change in climate result from behaviours 
of the rapidly growing human population consuming more natural resources for 
fulfillment of more natural resources for fulfillment of basic needs and high 
demands on health and comfort and interfering with homeostasis mechanisms of 
nature beyond adaptive capacities. Human adaptive potential is considered and 
strategies for adaptation are outlined aiming at an equilibrium between human 
and natural systems by behavioural modification, without loss of basic needs for 
health.

PMID: 1565932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Hosp J. 1999;14(3-4):229-46.

Reflections on the history of occupational stress in hospice/palliative care.

Vachon ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychosocial Oncology and Palliative Care, Sunnybrook and Women's College 
Health Sciences Center, USA.

The concept of hospice and palliative care emerged a quarter of a century ago 
out of recognition of the unmet needs of dying persons and the social issues of 
the 1960s and 1970s. The issues of the day included the sexual revolution; a 
questioning of social values; an increased awareness of death resulting from the 
murder of the Kennedy brothers and Martin Luther King and daily television 
exposure to deaths in the Vietnam War, feminism, consumerism, reclaiming a more 
humanized role in the birth process, and hence in the process of death. The 
history of the hospice movement and the stress experienced by staff is traced 
from the early developmental days through to the present. Initially there was 
sometimes a struggle to integrate the concepts of relief of physical symptoms 
with meeting the psychosocial and emotional needs of patients and families, 
caregivers were expected to sacrifice much of their personal life for work, 
emotional intensity was high and supports were developed to ease some of the 
stress experienced by caregivers. From the early days team stress and burnout 
have been issues of concern. In the 1980s issues involved establishing funding 
sources, dealing with the new crisis of AIDS, and dealing with the gap between 
the ideal and the real. In the 1990s the economic climate has escalated some of 
the tensions that have always existed as hospice attempts to position itself 
within mainstream care with diminishing fiscal resources. These are issues that 
confront us as we move into the next century.

PMID: 10839014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Br J Theatre Nurs. 1993 Jul;3(4):26-7.

ENB--resource and careers department.

Stringer E.

The English National Board for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting is aware 
that, in the current climate of change, a range of information is required by 
nurses, midwives and health visitors to enable them to update their professional 
knowledge and plan their careers. In response to this need the Board offers a 
comprehensive range of services through the Resource and Careers Department 
based in Sheffield. I will describe in detail the services provided by the 
Resource Section and then give a brief overview of the role and functions of the 
other sections, i.e. Publications, Careers Service and Projects. The Resource 
Section comprises three separate but interactive parts. These are the Health 
Care Database, Open Learning Resource and Reference Room and ENB Campus.

PMID: 8400526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Community Psychol. 1976 Oct;4(4):315-26. doi: 
10.1002/1520-6629(197610)4:4<315::aid-jcop2290040402>3.0.co;2-w.

Monitoring change in community-oriented treatment programs.

Bliss FH, Moos RH, Bromet EJ.

Changes in the social climate of two alcoholism treatment programs were 
evaluated by repeated assessments with the Community-Oriented Programs 
Environment Scale (COPES). The programs were similar in size and treatment 
orientation, but differed in physical and organizational setting, program 
length, and patient and staff characteristics. Specific and unique changes 
occurring within the treatment programs resulted in corresponding changes in 
relevant dimensions of the programs' social climates. The practical utility of 
COPES evaluations in instituting quality control and evaluating the results of 
change in community-oriented treatment programs is discussed.

DOI: 10.1002/1520-6629(197610)4:4<315::aid-jcop2290040402>3.0.co;2-w
PMID: 10243948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Health Serv Res. 1992 Apr;27(1):1-24.

Factors affecting physician loyalty and exit: a longitudinal analysis of 
physician-hospital relationships.

Burns LR(1), Wholey DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Management and Policy, College of Business and Public 
Administration, University of Arizona, Tucson 85721.

This article examines forces that influence physicians to change the percentage 
of their admissions to a hospital (loyalty) and to cease admitting patients to a 
hospital altogether (exit). Because physicians are both members of a hospital 
and consumers of its services, their admitting patterns can be described using 
models of employee commitment and consumer buying behavior. We test several 
hypotheses drawn from these literatures using data on physician admissions at 
hospitals over a two-year period. Results indicate that admitting patterns are 
explained primarily by convenience and inertia processes characteristic of 
consumer behavior. On the other hand, factors believed to influence 
organizational commitment (e.g., decision-making involvement, conflict, economic 
investments) have little effect on loyalty and exit. The findings question the 
utility of hospital strategies to improve the climate of physician-hospital 
relations, and suggest several qualifications for research on the commitment of 
professionals.

PMCID: PMC1069861
PMID: 1563950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Med Eng Technol. 1983 Jul-Aug;7(4):173-9. doi: 10.3109/03091908309041252.

Health activities of the U.S. Office of Technology Assessment.

Banta HD.

The Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) was formed as part of the US Congress 
of 1972. The 'Health Program' was established in 1975. The purpose of the OTA is 
to advise Congress on the positive and negative implications of technological 
change. Since its beginning, the Health Program has spent most of its effort in 
describing technology assessment in health care and federal policies toward such 
assessment. A number of specific medical technologies have also been evaluated. 
Reports on health-care topics by the OTA have had some specific effects in 
Congress, but the more important impact is probably on the broader climate of 
opinion concerning medical technology and its benefits, risks, and costs. 
Technology assessment has become an established part of the Congressional 
decision-making process and is being used increasingly in countries other than 
the United States.

DOI: 10.3109/03091908309041252
PMID: 6620352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Food Policy. 1986 Feb;11(1):7-11. doi: 10.1016/0306-9192(86)90041-2.

Alleviating rural poverty in sub-Saharan Africa.

El Sherbini AA.

PIP: This analysis of rural poverty and hunger in Africa discusses the 
intertemporal and cross-sectional dimensions of poverty as an aid to policies 
and programs to alleviate hunger. Since nutritional adequacy of diets varies 
according to season, seasonality is an important cause of poverty especially in 
countries with 1 major harvest. In agricultural communities the wet season 
brings on food shortages and high prices, requiring assistance programs to 
concentrate on alleviating hunger at this time of year. Drought places a similar 
demand on resources. People may be poorer in 1 section of a country than another 
if they have no access to the existing power system, depriving them of services 
and assistance. There are forgotten regions of Africa where people are poor due 
to physical isolation, increasing the risk of drought and impeding emergency 
relief. Production in these areas may be low because there are no consumer goods 
to buy with surplus. It is important to identify target groups for financial 
assistance which will change with time and environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/0306-9192(86)90041-2
PMID: 12340567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Community Health. 1991 Jun;16(3):143-9. doi: 10.1007/BF01323972.

Problems in the control of schistosomiasis in Asir Province, Saudi Arabia.

al-Madani AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Parasitology College of Medicine, 
King Saud University, Abha, Saudi Arabia.

Schistosomiasis, an endemic disease in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, is a major 
public health problem in Asir Province, the southwestern part of Saudi Arabia. 
The ongoing control program has concentrated on the elimination of the snail 
host by the use of chemical molluscicides, and on early detection and treatment 
of infected cases. Certain factors peculiar to this region make the application 
of the control strategy a difficult task. Thus, these methods of control over 
the years have not been very effective. Factors such as geography, climate, 
hydrographic conditions of this region, sources and spread of infection, and the 
role of primary health care centers are discussed in order to formulate plans 
for better control. Proper health planning is a dynamic process, and must 
constantly change based on past experience and epidemiological research.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01323972
PMID: 1860966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Dev Comm. 1999;10(1):68-77.

Social uses of commercial soap operas: a conversation with Miguel Sabido.

Singhal A, Obregon R.

PIP: This paper presents an interview with Miguel Sabido, a 
writer-producer-director of theater and soap operas in Mexico concerning the 
social uses of commercial soap operas. According to Sabido, television soap 
operas can play multiple roles in educating the public: 1) melodramatic soap 
operas represent a mediation between good and bad; 2) soap operas allow people 
to gossip on different characters, their dilemmas, and create a climate for 
social change, especially if it centers on key social issues; and 3) soap operas 
provide role models to emulate. Sabido stressed the importance of a theory-based 
method for producing drama and mentioned how theoreticians Bentley, Bandura, 
Maclean, and Jung influenced his writing and production of soap operas. 
According to Sabido, the social uses of commercial television are possible with 
socially responsible soap operas.

PMID: 12295321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Science. 1972 Feb 25;175(4024):846-53. doi: 10.1126/science.175.4024.846.

Esophageal cancer in the Caspian littoral of Iran: initial studies.

Kmet J, Mahboubi E.

A peculiar distribution of esophageal cancer was observed in the Caspian 
littoral of Iran, where an ad hoc cancer registry has been in operation since 
1968. A very high incidence, among the hghest recorded in the world, with a 
higher incidence in women than in men (male: 108.8 cases per 100,000 population; 
female: 174.1 per 100,000), was recorded in the northeastern corner of the 
region; this sparsely populated, semidesert area of the central Asian type, with 
predominantly saline soils, was settled by Turkomans. A lower incidence with a 
change in the male-to-female ratio was observed in the southeastern and central 
parts of the region, which are located in the piedmont area of the Elburz 
Mountains; these areas have more abundant rainfall and nonsaline soils, and are 
densely populated by Iranians. A steady decline in the incidence with an 
increase in the preponderance of male cases was observed toward the west, 
reaching the lowest figures (male: 17.2 cases per 100,000 population; female: 
5.5 per 100,000) in the Caspian rain belt, with its heavily leached soils and 
somewhat subtropical characteristcs. Changes in the natural vegetation and in 
the agricultural practices parallel the changing features of the climate. A 
multidisciplinary, multidisease, and multifactorial study is in preparation. By 
plotting the detailed physical, biotic, and cultural characteristics of the 
selected ecological regions on the intrinsic characteristics of the population 
groups experiencing different esophageal cancer risk, new and profitable working 
hypotheses as to the etiology of esophageal cancer might be produced.

DOI: 10.1126/science.175.4024.846
PMID: 5008604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Health Serv Res. 1985 Feb;19(6 Pt 1):753-74.

Organizational stress in the hospital: development of a model for diagnosis and 
prediction.

Gray-Toft PA, Anderson JG.

A model of organizational stress in the hospital was developed and tested. The 
model utilized measures of organizational climate, supervisory practices, and 
work group relations as predictors of the amount of role conflict and ambiguity 
that nurses perceived in providing patient care. Role conflict and ambiguity 
were treated as variables that intervene between organizational variables and 
the level of stress that the nursing staff experienced. Nursing stress was 
viewed as a direct cause of job dissatisfaction and as an indirect cause of 
absenteeism among the nursing staff. Data from 158 registered nurses, licensed 
practical nurses, and nursing assistants on seven nursing units in a 1,160-bed 
private teaching hospital were used to estimate the parameters of a structural 
equation model. The model was used to predict the results of a survey feedback 
project designed to change the supervisory style used on the units. Pre- and 
posttest data from four surgical units were used to validate the model. The 
findings suggest that, as predicted, supervisory practices that led to more open 
expression of views and joint problem solving resulted in reduced role conflict, 
ambiguity, and stress; increased job satisfaction; and lower levels of 
absenteeism among the nursing staff.

PMCID: PMC1068857
PMID: 3972593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Vector Ecol. 1998 Jun;23(1):47-53.

Social and cultural responses to emerging vector-borne diseases.

Winch P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins University, School of 
Hygiene and Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Emerging vector-borne diseases represent a formidable challenge to public 
health. Part of the challenge lies in the promoting behaviors such as 
self-protection from tick bites and use of mosquito nets early in the process of 
disease emergence to limit their impact on health. This paper will review two of 
the lessons that have been learned in research on HIV prevention, and their 
applicability to vector control programs. First, programs such as Thailand's 100 
Percent Condom Program have demonstrated the importance of implementing 
structural and environmental interventions to complement approaches that promote 
behavior change in individuals. Second, experience has shown that HIV and AIDS 
not only result in discrimination and lack of rights, but also that HIV and AIDS 
are much more likely to occur in people who are discriminated against or who 
lack basic human rights. Many vector-borne diseases are also more common among 
populations lacking basic human rights such as control over their land, 
political rights and access to water and sanitation. Tools such as geographic 
information systems and modeling of transmission could play an crucial role in 
showing us both the geography of human rights and social inequalities, and 
demonstrating how processes such as climate change interact with human rights to 
favor disease emergence. Spatial analyses can also indicate where structural and 
environmental interventions to promote human behavior change might be most 
effective.

PMID: 9673929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Psychosom Res. 1997 Sep;43(3):259-69. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3999(97)86865-1.

Stress and sensitization in children: a controlled prospective 
psychophysiological study of children exposed to international relocation.

Anderz√©n I(1), Arnetz BB, S√∂derstr√∂m T, S√∂derman E.

Author information:
(1)Karolinska Institute, National Institute for Psychosocial Factors and Health, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

This controlled prospective study investigated the development of sensitization 
as a result of international relocation in children, using the analyzing system 
Phadiatop. The effects of climate and predisposition to allergy were also 
measured. Children were examined prior to and during their first year of living 
abroad. A control group living at home was also examined during the same period. 
Participants answered a questionnaire before and after 1 year abroad, and blood 
samples were collected to determine sensitization. Before going abroad, there 
were no significant differences in atopic sensitization between groups nor in 
other key variables. After 1 year abroad, the proportion of children showing 
sensitization had increased significantly as compared with the control group at 
home. The exposed group reported an increase in skin symptoms during the year 
abroad. This study suggests that unidentified factors associated with foreign 
relocation increase the risk of sensitization in predisposed children. Stress 
might be one factor.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3999(97)86865-1
PMID: 9304552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. P R Health Sci J. 1986 Dec;5(3):119-22.

Incidence of insulin dependent diabetes mellitus in Puerto Rico: the University 
Pediatric Hospital experience.

Gonz√°lez de Pijem L, Cintr√≥n CJ, Carri√≥n F, Aguil√≥ F.

The incidence of newly-diagnosed Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) in a 
pediatric population has been found to increase with colder seasons in countries 
at latitudes where a marked weather change presumably triggers a higher 
prevalence of viral infections (especially respiratory), that may induce an 
insulitis which could be etiologically related with IDDM. In order to assess 
whether the opposite is true for a country with rather uniform climate, like 
Puerto Rico, we have studied the seasonal pattern of newly diagnosed IDDM seen 
at our institution during a 10 year period (1973-1982). Also, recent reports on 
a higher mortality from diabetes in Puerto Rico going from 16.6 in 1977 to 31.0 
in 1983, prompted us to look at a possible secular trend of increasing incidence 
of IDDM. There were a total of 269 new cases of IDDM or 27 cases/year, with 
standard deviation (SD) of +/- 5.3, range 18 to 33, and no secular trend at all. 
Sex distribution was quite variable, having male:female (m/f) ratios from 1:2 to 
3:1, and an over-all m/f of 13.3/13.6. Incidence of IDDM per month of year went 
from a low of 1.7 for April and November to a high of 3.0 for March and 2.9 for 
September, 2.8 for October, with a mean of 2.24 +/- 0.48 cases/month. Again, no 
significant seasonal differences were noted. Mean incidence for our "cold" 
months (November to April was 2.25/month; for our "hot" season (May to October) 
was 2.3/month; for our "rainy" season (July to December) 2.3 and for our "dry" 
season (January to April) 2.3/month. Thus, it appears that there are no such 
seasonal trends of IDDM In Puerto Rico.

PMID: 3562771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Am J Hosp Pharm. 1993 May;50(5):921-8.

Defining excellence.

Mehl B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY 10029.

Excellence in the pharmacy profession, particularly pharmacy management, is 
defined. Several factors have a significant effect on the ability to reach a 
given level of excellence. The first is the economic and political climate in 
which pharmacists practice. Stricter controls, reduced resources, and the 
velocity of change all necessitate nurturing of values and a work ethic to 
maintain excellence. Excellence must be measured by the services provided with 
regard to the resources available; thus, the ability to achieve excellence is a 
true test of leadership and innovation. Excellence is also time dependent, and 
today's innovation becomes tomorrow's standard. Programs that raise the level of 
patient care, not those that aggrandize the profession, are the most important. 
In addition, basic services must be practiced at a level of excellence. Quality 
assessment is a way to improve care and bring medical treatment to a higher 
plane of excellence. For such assessment to be effective and not punitive, the 
philosophy of the program must be known, and the goal must be clear. Excellence 
in practice is dependent on factors such as political and social norms, 
standards of practice, available resources; perceptions, time, the motivation to 
progress to a higher level, and the continuous innovation required to reshape 
the profession to meet the needs of society.

PMID: 8506871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Trop Med Int Health. 1998 Oct;3(10):818-27. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-3156.1998.00309.x.

Predicting key malaria transmission factors, biting and entomological 
inoculation rates, using modelled soil moisture in Kenya.

Patz JA(1), Strzepek K, Lele S, Hedden M, Greene S, Noden B, Hay SI, Kalkstein 
L, Beier JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Enviromental Health Sciences, John Hopkins School of Hygiene 
and Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205-2179, USA. jpatz@jhsph.edu

While malaria transmission varies seasonally, large inter-annual heterogeneity 
of malaria incidence occurs. Variability in entomological parameters, biting 
rates and entomological inoculation rates (EIR) have been strongly associated 
with attack rates in children. The goal of this study was to assess the 
weather's impact on weekly biting and EIR in the endemic area of Kisian, Kenya. 
Entomological data collected by the U.S. Army from March 1986 through June 1988 
at Kisian, Kenya was analysed with concurrent weather data from nearby Kisumu 
airport. A soil moisture model of surface-water availability was used to combine 
multiple weather parameters with landcover and soil features to improve disease 
prediction. Modelling soil moisture substantially improved prediction of biting 
rates compared to rainfall; soil moisture lagged two weeks explained up to 45% 
of An. gambiae biting variability, compared to 8% for raw precipitation. For An. 
funestus, soil moisture explained 32% variability, peaking after a 4-week lag. 
The interspecies difference in response to soil moisture was significant (P < 
0.00001). A satellite normalized differential vegetation index (NDVI) of the 
study site yielded a similar correlation (r = 0.42 An. gambiae). Modelled soil 
moisture accounted for up to 56% variability of An. gambiae EIR, peaking at a 
lag of six weeks. The relationship between temperature and An. gambiae biting 
rates was less robust; maximum temperature r2 = -0.20, and minimum temperature 
r2 = 0.12 after lagging one week. Benefits of hydrological modelling are 
compared to raw weather parameters and to satellite NDVI. These findings can 
improve both current malaria risk assessments and those based on El Ni√±o 
forecasts or global climate change model projections.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3156.1998.00309.x
PMID: 9809915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Addict Behav. 2000 Jul-Aug;25(4):573-8. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4603(99)00018-0.

Within-program factors as predictors of drinking outcome following 
cognitive-behavioral treatment.

Long CG(1), Williams M, Midgley M, Hollin CR.

Author information:
(1)St. Andrew's Hospital, Northampton, United Kingdom.

The relationship between a variety of within-treatment factors and the outcome 
of treatment for alcoholism was examined. One hundred and twenty-eight male and 
68 female participants (consecutive referrals with an ICD-10 diagnosis of 
alcohol dependence syndrome) were followed at 12 months following in- and 
day-patient cognitive behavioral treatment on an addiction unit. 
Within-treatment factors (of self-efficacy, psychological symptoms, expectations 
for treatment, treatment satisfaction, treatment climate, therapeutic alliance, 
and treatment evaluation), were assessed to determine their relationship to 
global outcome categorization into abstinent, nonproblem drinker, drinking but 
improved, and unimproved participant groups. A logistic regression analysis 
identified five variables that were predictive of a more favorable outcome: 
higher self-efficacy in positive social situations, greater treatment program 
involvement, a lower perception of staff control, a greater perception of 
treatment as helpful, and a reduction in psychological symptoms during 
treatment. Findings confirm previous research that pinpoints the importance of 
self-efficacy as a treatment variable of significance in treatment planning and 
delivery. It also highlights the prognostic significance of a reduction in 
psychological distress and, thus, the value of dynamic predictors of treatment 
outcome. The failure of the therapeutic alliance to predict outcome is 
discussed. It is concluded that time-limited alcoholism treatment programs need 
to give equal emphasis to within-treatment change via the promotion of patient 
confidence and the perception of helpfulness, as well as to skill-based relapse 
prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0306-4603(99)00018-0
PMID: 10972448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Health Phys. 1997 May;72(5):693-700. doi: 10.1097/00004032-199705000-00003.

Potential effects of climatic change on radiological doses from disposal of 
Canadian nuclear fuel waste.

Amiro BD(1).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Science Branch, AECL Whiteshell Laboratories, Pinawa, Manitoba, 
Canada.

The environmental assessment of deep geologic disposal of Canadian nuclear fuel 
waste considers many processes that could affect radionuclide transport to 
humans over thousands of years. Climatic change is an important feature that 
will occur over these long times. Glaciation will likely occur within the next 
100,000 years over much of Canada, and its impact on radiological doses has been 
assessed previously. In the present study, we investigate the potential effect 
of short-term climatic change, usually associated with global warming caused by 
increases in atmospheric trace gases. We study the main biosphere transport 
pathways causing a radiological dose to humans from 129I, which is the most 
important radionuclide in disposal of Canadian used nuclear fuel. Irrigation of 
a garden with contaminated well water is the main pathway and it can be affected 
by changes in temperature and precipitation. A cold, wet climate decreases the 
need for irrigation, and this decreases the radiological dose. A drastic 
climatic change, such as an increase in temperature from 10 to 20 degrees C and 
decrease in precipitation from 0.3 to 0.2 m during the growing season, is 
estimated to increase the dose by a factor of four. This is a relatively small 
change compared to the range of doses that arise from the variability and 
uncertainty in many of the parameters used in the environmental assessment 
models. Therefore, it is likely that the results of probabilistic dose 
assessment models can include the consequences of short-term climatic change.

DOI: 10.1097/00004032-199705000-00003
PMID: 9106709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 1999 Jan 30;119(3):388-90.

[Climatic changes in Scandinavia--consequences for public health].

[Article in Norwegian]

Kanestr√∏m I(1).

Author information:
(1)Institutt for geofysikk Universitetet i Oslo.

Atmospheric composition and climate conditions are of great importance for 
health. Increasing consumption of fossil fuels ever since the industrial 
revolution has resulted in higher contents of greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere. Primarily, this will increase the global temperature. Secondarily, 
it may change the patterns of precipitation and droughts. Higher extreme 
temperatures will have a negative effect on health. Climate changes can also 
change the living conditions of undesirable insects and microbes. The ozone gas 
in the atmosphere acts as a shield against the harmful ultraviolet radiation 
from the sun. Chlorofluorocarbons contribute to reduction of the ozone layer and 
increase ultraviolet radiation. Increased exposure of the skin to this radiation 
may cause damage such as sunburn and skin cancer. In order to avoid damage, it 
is of importance to wear protective clothing or use effective sunshades.

PMID: 10074837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Environ Monit Assess. 1995 Jan;37(1-3):265-71. doi: 10.1007/BF00546894.

Impact of desertification on temperature trends in the Middle East.

Nasrallah HA(1), Balling RC Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, Public Authority for Applied Education 
and Training, College of Health Sciences, Kuwait City, Kuwait.

The intense interest in desertification and climate change has stimulated 
detailed studies of temperature records in many areas of the world. In this 
investigation, the temperature records from the Middle East region are analyzed 
over the period 1950-1990. Results reveal a linear, statistically significant 
temperature increase of 0.07 ¬∞C/decade over the 41-year period. An analysis of 
spatial controls on these temperature changes reveals a warming effect 
associated with both overgrazing and the degree of human-induced 
desertification. The results of this study are consistent with theoretical and 
empirical studies predicting and demonstrating a warming signal associated with 
these land surface changes in the world's dryland areas.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00546894
PMID: 24197854


238. Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Feb;108(2):119-23. doi: 10.1289/ehp.00108119.

Impact of climatic change on the northern latitude limit and population density 
of the disease-transmitting European tick Ixodes ricinus.

Lindgren E(1), T√§lleklint L, Polfeldt T.

Author information:
(1)Natural Resources Management, Department of Systems Ecology, Stockholm 
University, Stockholm, Sweden. elisa@system.ecology.su.se

We examined whether a reported northward expansion of the geographic 
distribution limit of the disease-transmitting tick Ixodes ricinus and an 
increased tick density between the early 1980s and mid-1990s in Sweden was 
related to climatic changes. The annual number of days with minimum temperatures 
above vital bioclimatic thresholds for the tick's life-cycle dynamics were 
related to tick density in both the early 1980s and the mid-1990s in 20 
districts in central and northern Sweden. The winters were markedly milder in 
all of the study areas in the 1990s as compared to the 1980s. Our results 
indicate that the reported northern shift in the distribution limit of ticks is 
related to fewer days during the winter seasons with low minimum temperatures, 
i.e., below -12 degrees C. At high latitudes, low winter temperatures had the 
clearest impact on tick distribution. Further south, a combination of mild 
winters (fewer days with minimum temperatures below -7 degrees C) and extended 
spring and autumn seasons (more days with minimum temperatures from 5 to 8 
degrees C) was related to increases in tick density. We conclude that the 
relatively mild climate of the 1990s in Sweden is probably one of the primary 
reasons for the observed increase of density and geographic range of I. ricinus 
ticks.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.00108119
PMCID: PMC1637900
PMID: 10656851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Int J Nurs Stud. 1999 Feb;36(1):85-91. doi: 10.1016/s0020-7489(98)00061-3.

Nurse education in an international context: the contribution of contingency.

Traynor M(1), Rafferty AM.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Policy in Nursing Research, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, UK. michael@rentray.demon.co uk

Attempts to reform nurse education in the U.K. have met with limited success. A 
brief examination of similar moves in other countries reveals a similar 
situation. Placing experiences in this country in the context of global reform, 
it is possible to suggest that three sets of conditions need to be satisfied for 
change to follow: these relate to context, convergence and contingency. Context 
refers to the creation of a positive climate of opinion or a case and pressure 
for change. Convergence refers to the fortuitous fusion of professional and 
government agendas. Contingency provides the unforeseen consequence, the spark 
that ignites a policy change. The implications for further educational reform in 
this country are briefly discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0020-7489(98)00061-3
PMID: 10375070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Indian J Med Res. 1997 May;105:226-34.

Human heat tolerance in simulated environment.

Nag PK(1), Ashtekar SP, Nag A, Kothari D, Bandyopadhyay P, Desai H.

Author information:
(1)Ergonomics Division, National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad.

The heat tolerance of 11 male volunteers were examined under seven climatic 
conditions in a climatic chamber. The conditions were 38 to 49 degrees C dry 
bulb temperature and 45 to 80 per cent relative humidity, i.e., 32.3 to 40 
degrees C effective temperature-basic [ET(B)]. The ET(B) values were equated to 
other heat stress indices, e.g., WBGT (Wet-bulb Globe Temperature Index) and 
Oxford Index. The subjects did ergometric work at an intensity of 60 per cent 
VO2max. The exposure durations were decided by the cardiorespiratory, body 
temperature and sweating responses. Of the climatic conditions studied, at 35.4, 
38, 39 and 40 degrees C ET(B), the body core temperature (Tcr) reached over 39 
degrees C and heart rates attained 172 to 182 beats/min, which were taken as the 
tolerance limit. The total oxygen demand significantly varied with the increase 
in environmental warmth, i.e., increase or decrease of one litre of oxygen 
demand was equivalent to one minute change in tolerance time. The volunteers 
were not susceptible to heat; only in extreme hot situations beyond 35.4 degrees 
C ET(B), were unacceptable levels of physiological and psychophysical reactions 
seen. The study suggests the acceptable and tolerable limits for human exposure 
in heat: (i) acceptable at 38 to 38.2 degrees C Tcr for a tolerance time of 80 
to 85 min; and (ii) the tolerable limit of short duration (40-45 min) at 39 
degrees C Tcr that corresponded to 31.5 and 36.5 degrees C ET(B).

PMID: 9183079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 2000 Apr;73(3):187-94. doi: 
10.1007/s004200050026.

Improvement of thermophysiological stress in participants wearing protective 
clothing for spraying pesticide, and its application in the field.

Hayashi C(1), Tokura H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Living Science, Nagano Prefectural College, Japan. 
chiho@seagreen.ocn.ne.jp

Thermoregulatory responses were compared under two experimental conditions, in 
the laboratory (Experiment I), and in the field (Experiment II), between two 
kinds of protective clothing for spraying pesticides. One was currently being 
used (Type A), and was composed of ready made Gore-Tex clothing, mask, 
polyurethane gloves and rubber boots. The other one was newly designed (Type B), 
and was composed of pesticide-proof clothing (100% cotton with water repellent 
finish), mask, Gore-Tex gloves, and special boots consisting of rubber for the 
feet and ankle and Gore-Tex around the legs. In addition, the head and chest 
were cooled by frozen gel strips fixed in the cap and undershirt. In Experiment 
I, five female adults took part, in a climate-chamber controlled at an ambient 
temperature of 28 degrees C and a relative humidity of 60%. In Experiment II, 
five farmers (one male and four female) were tested in an apple orchard in July, 
August and September. The main results are summarized as follows: (1) change of 
rectal temperature was inhibited more effectively in Type B in Experiment I, (2) 
change of heart rate tended to be lower in Type B than in Type A in both 
experiments, (3) salivary lactic acid concentration at the end of the first 
exercise was significantly higher in Type A than in Type B in Experiment I, (4) 
the number of contractions in the handgrip exercise which was performed 
immediately after the third exercise, was significantly smaller in Type A than 
in Type B in Experiment I, (5) subjective comfort sensation was significantly 
improved in Type B in Experiments I and II. Thus, it was concluded that the 
newly designed protective clothing could reduce thermal stress during the 
spraying of pesticides in an apple orchard in summer.

DOI: 10.1007/s004200050026
PMID: 10787134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Int J Health Serv. 1987;17(3):475-87. doi: 10.2190/5GVU-86Y6-NH1U-PQB0.

Economic instability, unemployment rates, behavioral risks, and mortality rates 
in Scotland, 1952-1983.

Brenner MH.

Short-term relations (under five years) between national unemployment and 
cause-specific mortality rates have been found in several industrialized 
countries in Europe and North America including the United States and, 
separately, Scotland and England/Wales. Long-term cumulative relations (at least 
a decade) have been found between national unemployment and age-adjusted 
mortality rates for eight countries including England/Wales. In this article it 
is demonstrated that, controlling for the significant effects of per capita 
cigarette, spirits, and fat consumption, and cold winter temperatures, there is 
in Scotland a significant long-term relation (at least a decade) between 
cumulative change in unemployment rates and mortality rates-for all causes, for 
total heart disease, and in particular for ischemic heart disease. Also, the 
exponential trend in real per capita income is related to mortality declines. 
Other writers have encountered difficulty in measuring this long-term relation 
between unemployment and cause-specific mortality in Scotland in the absence of 
controls for at least alcohol and tobacco consumption per capita.

DOI: 10.2190/5GVU-86Y6-NH1U-PQB0
PMID: 3623777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Jun;108(6):563-8. doi: 10.1289/ehp.00108563.

Assessing confounding, effect modification, and thresholds in the association 
between ambient particles and daily deaths.

Schwartz J(1).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Epidemiology Program, Department of Environmental Health, 
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
jschwrtz@hsph.harvard.edu

I examined the relationship between daily deaths and airborne particles in 10 
U.S. cities with varying climatic conditions and seasons in which particle 
concentrations were high. Airborne particles were associated with significant 
increases in daily deaths [0.67% increase for a 10 microg/m(3) increase in 
particles; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.52-0.81%]. This association was the 
same in summer and winter. To examine potential confounding by other pollutants, 
I regressed city- and season-specific effect sizes against the relationship 
between airborne particles and other pollutants. Controlling for other 
pollutants did not substantially (or significantly) change the estimated effect 
of airborne particles. Socioeconomic differences between cities likewise did not 
modify the effect. The increase in daily deaths that occurred out of hospitals 
(0.89% per 10 microg/m(3); CI, 0.67-1.10%) was substantially greater than the 
increase in deaths in hospitals (0. 49%; CI, 0.31-0.68%). This is consistent 
with results previously reported in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and suggests 
that the particle-associated deaths are not just being brought forward by a few 
days. It is also consistent with recent animal and human studies of the 
mechanisms of particle toxicity.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.00108563
PMCID: PMC1638159
PMID: 10856032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Parasitol Today. 1997 Mar;13(3):112-9. doi: 10.1016/s0169-4758(97)01009-0.

Geographic information systems and the distribution of Schistosoma mansoni in 
the Nile delta.

Malone JB(1), Abdel-Rahman MS, El Bahy MM, Huh OK, Shafik M, Bavia M.

Author information:
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University. Baton Rouge, LA 
70803, USA.

New computer-based sensor technology and geographic methods have led to emerging 
interest in use of satellite environmental assessment tools for design of 
disease control programs, especially for those that are vector borne. The 
long-range goal of work reported here by John Malone and colleagues on behalf of 
this Egyptian Ministry of Health-USAID Schistosomiasis Research Project team 
(Box 1) is to utilize data from sensor systems on board earth-observing 
satellites to develop more-sensitive disease-prediction and -control models. If 
successful, methods developed may provide a potentially vital capability for use 
by disease control program managers, particularly in less-developed countries, 
where mapping resources are not well advanced. Longer term, broader basic 
questions on the interaction of environment and disease in anticipation of 
predicted global climate change may be addressed. These studies focused on the 
lower Nile river basin of Egypt. The specific objective was to link data on 
environmental requirements for propagation and transmission of schistosomiasis 
with parameters measurable from space.

DOI: 10.1016/s0169-4758(97)01009-0
PMID: 15275115


245. Am J Hum Biol. 1995;7(5):643-650. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.1310070512.

Effect of drink pattern and solar radiation on thermoregulation and fluid 
balance during exercise in chronically heat acclimatized children.

Santana JRR(1), Rivera-Brown AM(2), Frontera WR(2), Rivera MA(2), Mayol PM(1), 
Bar-Or O(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Pulmonary Program, Department of Pediatrics, University of Puerto 
Rico School of Medicine, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(2)Center for Sports Health and Exercise Sciences at Albergue Ol√≠mpico, 
Department of Physical Medicine, Rehabilitation and Sports Medicine, University 
of Puerto Rico School of Medicine, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(3)Childrens Exercise and Nutrition Centre, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
Ontario, Canada.

The purposes of this study were to examine the thermoregulatory and body fluid 
balance responses in chronically heat acclimatized children, i.e., indigenous to 
a tropical climate, during exercise in four outdoor conditions and the effects 
of dehydration on their thermoregulatory response. Nine children (age = 13.3 ¬± 
1.9 yr, VO2 max = 45.5 ¬± 9.2 ml ¬∑ kg-1 ¬∑ min-1 ) cycled at 60% VO2 max each 
under four conditions: sun exposure voluntary drinking (SuVD), sun exposure 
forced drinking (SuFD), shaded voluntary drinking (ShVD), and shaded forced 
drinking (ShFD). Exercise sessions consisted of four 20-min exercise bouts 
alternating with 25-min rest periods. Globe temperature and the WBGT index were 
higher during SuVD and SuFD compared to ShVD and ShFD (P < 0.05). The change in 
rectal temperature, metabolic heat production, and heat storage did not differ 
among the conditions. Total water intake (% IBW) was higher during SuFD (4.1 ¬± 
0.01) and ShFD (3.7 ¬± 0.1) compared to SuVD (2.1 ¬± 0.1) and ShVD (1.0 ¬± 0.1) and 
during SuVD compared to ShVD (P < 0.05). Sweating rate (L ¬∑ hr-1 ) was higher 
during SuFD (0.7 ¬± 0.1) and ShFD (0.6 ¬± 0.1) compared to SuVD (0.5 ¬± 0.1) and 
ShVD (0.4 ¬± 0.1) (P < 0.05). Total fluid loss did not differ among conditions 
(SuVD = 1.7 ¬± 0.4; SuFD = 1.5 ¬± 0.4; ShVD = 2.1 ¬± 0.2; ShFD = 1.3 ¬± 0.3). 
Results indicate that when exercising in a tropical climate, chronically heat 
acclimatized children demonstrate mild voluntary dehydration and adequate heat 
dissipation. ¬© 1995 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Copyright ¬© 1995 Wiley-Liss, Inc., A Wiley Company.

DOI: 10.1002/ajhb.1310070512
PMID: 28557118


246. Int J Nurs Stud. 1988;25(2):125-34. doi: 10.1016/0020-7489(88)90080-6.

Nursing in the 1980s and 1990s--a challenge for managers.

Duffield C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia.

The 1980s have seen a significant number of pressures placed on the health care 
system and the nursing profession. Such pressures include an adverse economic 
climate, the impact of technology, the rise of consumerism, the transfer of 
basic nurse education into the tertiary education sector and the move to 
privatization in health care. These pressures require skills not previously 
expected of nurse administrators in order to effect a smooth transition through 
these times of change. Failure to manage effectively has led to staff shortages 
and increased industrial militancy, two symptoms present in Australia at the 
moment. An overview of the present climate in this country is presented for 
consideration of effective management practices for the future.

DOI: 10.1016/0020-7489(88)90080-6
PMID: 3133321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Asia Pac Popul J. 1990 Jun;5(2):73-8.

The population dilemma.

Kunugi T.

PIP: Technology and population rely on each other for sustenance and growth. 
Technology has helped produce more food, provide better health care, better 
communication, faster modes of travel, better consumer durables, greater 
amenities, and increased the quality of life for millions of people. There has 
been a price in terms of the widening gap between the technology of the 
developed and developing countries. There has also been rapid population growth 
that has resulted in a host of ills. Further, technology itself has produced 
toxic wastes and consumed a large amount of natural resources. This situation is 
easily seen as a dilemma between the limitless promises of technology and the 
limited resources created by large populations. The solution to the dilemma is 
sustainable development, a concept often talked about but seldom realized. The 
90s will be a crucial decade for sustainable development as population is 
growing by 90 million/annum. 90% of the increase is occurring in developing 
countries. Within each country there is a trend towards urbanization. By 2000, 
75% of Latin Americans, 42% of Africans, and 37% of Asians will live in urban 
environments. By 2050 there should be 100s of millions of migrants running from 
the slowly rising sea. The survival equation is sustainability S equals 
resources R time ingenuity 1 over population P. This is a conceptual equation, 
but it does illustrate that the impact of human ingenuity is just as important 
as resources. World commitment must come before any meaningful change will 
occur. The almost universal acceptance of human rights and fundamental freedoms 
exceeds the will to change in decision makers and expert consultants.

PMID: 12283486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Parassitologia. 2000 Dec;42(3-4):255-90.

The community-based malaria control programme in Tigray, northern Ethiopia. A 
review of programme set-up, activities, outcomes and impact.

Ghebreyesus TA(1), Witten KH, Getachew A, Yohannes AM, Tesfay W, Minass M, 
Bosman A, Teklehaimanot A.

Author information:
(1)Tigray Health Bureau, PO Box 7, Mekelle, Ethiopia. tedrosag@hotmail.com

Tigray, the northernmost state of Ethiopia, has a population of 3.5 million, 86% 
rural, and 56% living in malarious areas. In 1992 a Community-Based Malaria 
Control Programme was established to provide region-wide and sustained access to 
early diagnosis and treatment of malaria at the village level. 735 volunteer 
community health workers (CHWs) serve 2,327 villages with a population of 1.74 
million, treating an average of 489,378 patients yearly from 1994 to 1997. 
Recognition of clinical malaria is similar for CHWs and health staff at clinics 
where there is no access to microscopy. In 1996 a pilot community-financing 
scheme of insecticide-treated bednets was well accepted, but re-impregnation 
rates fell in 1998 because of war-related social upheaval. Indicators from 
health institutions show a progressive increase in malaria morbidity from 1994 
to 1998. Repeated mortality surveys show a 40% reduction in death rates in 
under-5 children from 1994 to 1996 and a 10% increase from 1996 to 1998. These 
trends may be related to increased malaria transmission with water resources 
development, increased seasonal labour migration to malarious lowlands, 
prolongation of the transmission season with climate changes, and increasing 
chloroquine resistance throughout Ethiopia. Progressive extension of CHW 
services to ensure better coverage of women, children, migrant workers and 
communities near water development projects, change to first-line treatment with 
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, extension of the impregnated bednet initiative, and 
development of a regional warning system for epidemics should result in a 
greater impact on morbidity and mortality.

PMID: 11686085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Neurosurg. 1994 Oct;81(4):525-30. doi: 10.3171/jns.1994.81.4.0525.

Seasonal fluctuation in the incidence of intracranial aneurysm rupture and its 
relationship to changing climatic conditions.

Chyatte D(1), Chen TL, Bronstein K, Brass LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio.

Comment in
    J Neurosurg. 1995 Jul;83(1):182-3.
    J Neurosurg. 1995 May;82(5):912-3.

Seasonal and climatic variations have been linked to the occurrence of some 
types of cerebrovascular disease; however, the conditions that lead to 
intracranial aneurysm rupture are not known. The purpose of the present study 
was to determine whether seasonal and climatic conditions are related to 
intracranial aneurysm rupture. Data provided by the Connecticut Health 
Information Management and Exchange were analyzed for all patients with a 
primary diagnosis of aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) for the fiscal 
years 1981, 1983, 1985, 1987, 1988, and 1989. Patient records were correlated 
with climatic conditions for the years 1981 to 1989 obtained from the National 
Climatic Data Center, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National 
Environmental Satellite Data, and Information Service. During the time periods 
studied, 1487 patients with a primary diagnosis of aneurysmal SAH were treated 
by reporting hospitals. Seasonal variation in the incidence of aneurysmal SAH 
and admission clustering were observed but differed significantly between men 
and women. Men showed a single large peak in late fall (Roger's r = 11.5, p < 
0.005), whereas women had an annual peak occurring in late spring (Roger's r = 
10.3, p < 0.01). Substantial climatic change occurred during the 72 hours prior 
to 10 of the 14 clusters of men who were admitted (p < 0.01, Yates' corrected 
chi-square 7.33, df = 1). In contrast, clusters of women admitted were not 
related to preceding climatic change (p > 0.25, Yates' corrected chi-square 
0.06, df = 1). Hospital admissions for aneurysmal SAH display seasonal 
fluctuation, with women showing a different seasonal pattern from men. Changing 
climatic conditions precede aneurysm rupture in men but not in women, which 
suggests that weather is causally related to aneurysm rupture in men, and that 
factors that lead to aneurysm rupture in women may be different from those in 
men. These data do not explain why weather fronts or gradients are associated 
with aneurysm rupture in men.

DOI: 10.3171/jns.1994.81.4.0525
PMID: 7931585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Pediatrics. 1998 Aug;102(2):e17. doi: 10.1542/peds.102.2.e17.

Kangaroo mother care and the bonding hypothesis.

Tessier R(1), Cristo M, Velez S, Giron M, de Calume ZF, Ruiz-Palaez JG, Charpak 
Y, Charpak N.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Laval University, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Based on the general bonding hypothesis, it is suggested that 
kangaroo mother care (KMC) creates a climate in the family whereby parents 
become prone to sensitive caregiving. The general hypothesis is that 
skin-to-skin contact in the KMC group will build up a positive perception in the 
mothers and a state of readiness to detect and respond to infant's cues.
METHOD: The randomized controlled trial was conducted on a set of 488 infants 
weighing <2001 g, with 246 in the KMC group and 242 in the traditional care (TC) 
group. The design allows precise observation of the timing and duration of 
mother-infant contact, and takes into account the infant's health status at 
birth and the socioeconomic status of the parents. BONDING ASSESSMENT: Two 
series of outcomes are assessed as manifestations of a mother's attachment 
behavior. The first is the mother's feelings and perceptions of her premature 
birth experience, including her sense of competence, feelings of worry and 
stress, and perception of social support. The second outcome is derived from 
observations of the mother and child's responsivity to each other during 
breastfeeding at 41 weeks of gestational age.
INTERVENTIONS: KMC has three components. The first is the kangaroo position. 
Once the premature infant has adapted to extrauterine life and is able to 
breastfeed, he is positioned on the mother's chest, in a upright position, with 
direct skin-to-skin contact. The second component is kangaroo nutrition. 
Although breastfeeding is the prime source of nutrition, infants also may 
receive preterm formula whenever necessary and vitamin supplements. The third 
component is the clinical control; infants are monitored on a regular basis, 
daily until they are gaining at least 20 g per day. Afterward, weekly clinic 
visits are scheduled until term, which constitutes the ambulatory minimal 
neonatal care. In the TC group, infants are kept in incubators until they are 
able to self-regulate their temperature and are thriving (ie, have an 
appropriate weight gain). Infants are discharged according to current hospital 
practice, usually not before their weight is approximately 1700 g. Afterward, as 
with the KMC group, weekly clinic visits are scheduled until term.
RESULTS: We observed a change in the mothers' perception of her child, 
attributable to the skin-to-skin contact in the kangaroo-carrying position. This 
effect is related to a subjective "bonding effect" that may be understood 
readily by the empowering nature of the KMC intervention. Moreover, in stressful 
situations when the infant has to remain in the hospital longer, mothers 
practicing KMC feel more competent than do mothers in the TC group. This is what 
we call a resilience effect. In these stressful situations we also found a 
negative effect on the feelings of received support of mothers practicing KMC. 
We interpret this as an isolation effect. To thwart this deleterious effect, we 
would suggest adding social support as an integral component of KMC. The 
observations of the mothers' sensitive behavior did not show a definite bonding 
effect, but rather a resilience effect. This is attributable to the KMC 
intervention; mothers practicing KMC were more responsive to an at-risk infant 
whose development has been threatened by a longer hospital stay. Otherwise, we 
observed that the mothers (in both the KMC group and the TC group) had 
behavioral patterns that were adapted to the child's at-risk health status and 
to the precarious condition of some premature infants requiring intensive care. 
We conclude that the infant's health status may be a more prominent factor in 
explaining a mother's more sensitive behavior, which overshadows the 
kangaroo-carrying effect.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that KMC should be promoted actively and that 
mothers should be encouraged to use it as soon as possible during the intensive 
care period up to the 40 weeks of gestational age. Thus, KMC should be viewed as 
a means of humanizing the process of g

DOI: 10.1542/peds.102.2.e17
PMID: 9685462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Am J Prev Med. 1996 Sep-Oct;12(5 Suppl):109-19.

The cycle of violence and victimization: a study of the school-based 
intervention of a multidisciplinary youth violence-prevention program.

Nadel H(1), Spellmann M, Alvarez-Canino T, Lausell-Bryant LL, Landsberg G.

Author information:
(1)School Mediation and Violence Prevention Division, Victim Services, New York, 
NY 10007, USA.

This article reports on the school-based intervention component of a 
multidisciplinary program intended to reduce and prevent youth violence in the 
East New York neighborhood of Brooklyn. This intervention is based on three 
theories. The first theory posits that modifying beliefs, attitudes, and norms 
will help youths develop behaviors that support nonviolence. The second 
theoretical construct asserts that enhancing relationships with peers and family 
will buffer youths from the effects of exposure to violence. Finally, the third 
theory suggests that changing aspects of the setting and climate that contribute 
to violent behavior will prevent violence. The school-based intervention, the 
Safe Harbor, is a victim-assistance and violence-prevention program. The Safe 
Harbor offers activities including a 20-lesson violence-prevention and 
victim-assistance curriculum, counseling, parent involvement, teacher training, 
and school-change campaigns. The evaluation design is a panel study, with 
cohorts surveyed longitudinally at nonequivalent intervals. One hundred and 
fifteen seventh- and eighth-grade students who receive the curriculum and other 
services are the experimental group; the other 879 students in the seventh and 
eighth grades serve as the comparison group. Baseline data were collected 
through a survey of the entire school before the program's implementation in 
January 1995. Subsequent data collection will include interviews and focus 
groups; future analysis will address how participation in other parts of the 
Safe Harbor program or other programs in the school affects outcomes. The 
participation rate for the baseline survey in the experimental group was 86%, in 
the comparison group 76%. Responses to the survey questions were virtually 
identical between the two groups. Preliminary analyses reflect a climate of 
pervasive violence in the school, family, and community. More than half of the 
sample reported witnessing a severe beating in the school or their community 
within the past four months. Forty-four percent witnessed someone being attacked 
with a weapon in their neighborhood. The psychological consequences of exposure 
to violence were severe-51% of the sample reported post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) symptoms. A number of lessons have been learned from 
implementing and evaluating this project, including the importance of fostering 
community partnership and strong relationships with the school, and addressing 
both reactions to victimization and norms and beliefs about aggression.

PMID: 8909631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Eur Psychiatry. 1999 Sep;14(5):291-7. doi: 10.1016/s0924-9338(99)00168-6.

Should severely disturbed psychiatric patients be distributed or concentrated in 
specialized wards? An empirical study on the effects of hospital organization on 
ward atmosphere, aggressive behavior, and sexual molestation.

Gebhardt RP(1), Steinert T.

Author information:
(1)Centre of Psychiatry Weissenau, Sector Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry I 
of the University of Ulm, Weingartshoferstrasse 2, 88214 Ravensburg, Germany.

This study examines whether ward atmosphere, aggressive behavior, and sexual 
molestation will change after severely disturbed patients have been distributed 
over several wards determined by their place of residence, instead of 
concentrating them in locked single-sex wards. Four wards for predominantly 
psychotic patients were investigated with the German version of the Ward 
Atmosphere Scale (WAS), and some further questions about the observation of 
aggressive behavior and sexual molestation once before and twice after internal 
sectorisation, partial ward opening, and mixing the sexes were asked. 
Questionnaires (345: 162 staff members, 183 patients) were evaluated. After the 
structural changes, a significant improvement of ward atmosphere and a reduction 
of aggressive behavior was found on average in all wards, whereas the impact on 
sexual molestation remained unclear. Internal sectorisation and sex integration 
policy, resulting in distributing rather than concentrating severely disturbed 
patients, have beneficial effects on the social climate of acute wards.

DOI: 10.1016/s0924-9338(99)00168-6
PMID: 10572360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Int Q Community Health Educ. 1996 Jan 1;16(1):25-46. doi: 
10.2190/EMCN-H455-YKAQ-TGX6.

Was the intervention implemented as intended?: a process evaluation of an AIDS 
prevention intervention in rural zimbabwe.

Laver SM(1), Van Den Borne B, Kok G, Woelk G.

Author information:
(1)University of Zimbabwe.

End-point evaluations are still the most commonly used method of assessing the 
success or failure of interventions. This article describes how a process 
evaluation was used to measure "what happened" during an HIV/AIDS prevention 
program for farm workers in Zimbabwe. The intervention was developed according 
to the Paulo Freirian theory of Social Change and the Ecological Model for 
health promotion. The stages of the intervention were cyclical; in the first 
stage innovative methods were used to encourage appraisal of vulnerability to 
HIV/AIDS through activities which raised critical thinking and dialogue. In the 
next phase, emphasis was placed on developing cognitive and attitude change in 
the target group. Self-protective behavior was encouraged through condom use and 
an increase in self-efficacy with respect to negotiating safe sex, especially 
among women. In the last stage of the intervention, efforts were made to create 
a climate for maintenance of behavior and socially responsible action within the 
community. The process evaluation provided valuable insight into factors which, 
when aggregated, provided an overview of a program whose successes and failures 
may well have been determined by issues outside the scope of the intervention. 
The effect of seasonal fluctuations of labor, income, and farming activity on 
program activity, patterns of STD, and condom demand were marked. This leads 
back to the researchers' initial question: "Was the intervention implemented as 
planned?" and the answer-only partially.

DOI: 10.2190/EMCN-H455-YKAQ-TGX6
PMID: 20841035


254. Stud Fam Plann. 1988 Nov-Dec;19(6 Pt 1):313-34.

Determinants of reproductive change in a traditional society: evidence from 
Matlab, Bangladesh.

Phillips JF(1), Simmons R, Koenig MA, Chakraborty J.

Author information:
(1)Population Council, New York, NY 10017.

A decade has elapsed since a project was launched in Matlab, Bangladesh to test 
the hypothesis that contraceptive services can induce and sustain fertility 
decline in a rural traditional population. The demographic impact of this 
project has been pronounced, lending support to the view that supply-side 
policies can succeed even where institutional supports for demand are weak. This 
paper reviews the relationship between the Bangladesh climate of demand and the 
Matlab system of supply with the aim of explaining how such effects arise. A 
sociologically appropriate system of supply can induce fertility change in a 
society where such change would not spontaneously arise. The study of programs 
and the "sociology of the supply side" thus deserve the same degree of rigor 
accorded to research on the "sociology of demand."

PMID: 3068840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1995 Apr;61(4):1520-6. doi: 
10.1128/aem.61.4.1520-1526.1995.

Effects of temperature and host cell growth phase on replication of F-specific 
RNA coliphage Q beta.

Woody MA(1), Cliver DO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Food Research Institute, World Health 
Organization Collaborating Centre on Food Virology, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706-1187, USA.

Human enteric viruses have been found in groundwater in the absence of fecal 
coliforms. Because detection of human enteric viruses is costly, time-consuming, 
and lacking in sensitivity, F-specific RNA (FRNA) coliphages, which infect 
Escherichia coli by attachment to F pili, are being examined for suitability as 
indicators of human enteric viruses in groundwater. Temperatures and host cell 
growth conditions that constrain F-pilus expression will limit FRNA coliphage 
replication in groundwater and wastewater, as is desirable in an indicator. 
Below 25 degrees C F-pilus synthesis ceases; FRNA coliphage Qbeta did not 
replicate below this temperature in batch cultures. One-step replication studies 
indicated that the replicative cycle is prolonged and that fewer progeny are 
released as the temperature decreases. The decreases in phage replication 
observed in the one-step replication studies were a consequence of fewer cells 
infected as the temperature was lowered or as host cells entered stationary 
phase. The numbers of phage particles released from infected cells did not 
change. The minimum temperature for replication of Qbeta, 25 degrees C, is not 
maintained in wastewater and does not occur in Wisconsin groundwater. On the 
basis of temperature and host cell growth phase, we have concluded that 
extensive replication of FRNA coliphages does not occur in wastewater and 
groundwater in Wisconsin and areas with similar cool climates.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.61.4.1520-1526.1995
PMCID: PMC167408
PMID: 7747969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Physician Exec. 1998 Jul-Aug;24(4):40-4.

After the revolution: the physician executive of the future.

Goldener J(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Associates of the Main Line, USA. jgoldener@pol.net

There is a revolution in health care occurring in our midst. The roots of this 
revolution are explored. The physician executive of the future will need a new 
set of skills because the health care system will change. This new, evolving set 
of skills includes being: Savvy about business; simultaneously employer- and 
customer-focused; and technologically driven. This manager must be a team 
builder rather than a lone ranger. These skills are learnable, just like 
piloting a plane or doing a surgery. None of us was born with the skill to 
practice medicine any more than we were born with business skills. While many 
physicians are depressed by the present health care climate, feeling a loss of 
power and a loss in spirit, the vision of the physician manager must carry them 
and the organizations they build forward through uncharted waters to a future 
which is every bit as exciting as our past.

PMID: 10186383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. AAOHN J. 1989 Oct;37(10):404-11.

Counseling employees at risk for HIV.

Nelson LM, Hellman SL.

The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is a preventable, bloodborne, 
and sexually transmitted disease which represents the major public health crisis 
of the century. Because treatments are costly and in their infancy, education in 
disease prevention is a major tool in battling this epidemic. One technique is 
to target individuals whose behavior places them at risk for infection and then 
providing individualized counseling and HIV antibody testing. The HIV antibody 
test is an important complement to diagnosis and care, and a mechanism to 
educate and foster behavior change through counseling in those who believe they 
are at risk. The occupational health nurse's role is to assess employees' risk 
and provide or refer those employees with a risk factor for individualized 
counseling and voluntary HIV antibody testing. Counseling and testing should be 
provided by a knowledgeable health care provider in a climate that protects 
individuals from discrimination and provides confidentiality.

PMID: 2789529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. South Med J. 1993 Sep;86(9):1033-5. doi: 10.1097/00007611-199309000-00012.

Group psychotherapy for patients with dementia.

Greene JA(1), Ingram TA, Johnson W.

Author information:
(1)Center for Health and Creative Aging, Knoxville, Tenn.

Some of the goals of our group psychotherapy sessions on the inpatient unit 
include (1) creation of an emotional climate of acceptance and warmth that helps 
patients learn to accept themselves and their feelings, (2) frequent 
intervention by the group facilitator/therapist to help facilitate social 
interaction for patients whose communication ability is impaired, (3) 
opportunity for patients to experience the feeling of belonging, of being part 
of a group, (4) opportunity for patients to ventilate feelings and rediscover 
mutual kinds of experience, (5) opportunity for patients to reminisce about past 
accomplishments and give new meaning to their current lives, and (6) creation of 
a platform for patients to achieve a sense of self by expressing personal 
opinions in an environment of respect and acceptance. The outcome of group 
therapy for demented as well as nondemented patients should be increased ability 
to cope with losses at several levels, promotion of new skills, increased 
adaptation skills, and increased ability to accept change. We also want patients 
to learn to express feelings and to realize that the expression of feelings can 
have a positive outcome (relief from repression, clarification of ambivalence, 
solutions, etc).

DOI: 10.1097/00007611-199309000-00012
PMID: 8367749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Qual Assur. 1991 Jan-Feb;13(1):26-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1945-1474.1991.tb00121.x.

Total management, not total quality management.

Sherman VC.

Corrected and republished from
    J Qual Assur 1990 Sep-Oct;12(4):26-9.

Part I: "The Quality Problem is Real." Hospitals fail because of management. 
This failure is primarily a result of a lack of a total management (TM) 
approach. This leads to a crazy quilt of individual add-on programs and projects 
which struggle to survive in a management climate of constant crisis and 
reactivity. Worthy initiatives like total quality management (TQM) are at high 
risk in such organizations and run the risk of failure. Part II: "The Need for 
Total Management." In order for quality improvement efforts to succeed, there 
must first be a reorientation of the organization's management approach and 
culture. What is needed is organization development which reorients the hospital 
to TM. This New American Hospital creates the foundation for specific change 
tools such as TQM.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1945-1474.1991.tb00121.x
PMID: 10109553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Health Care Superv. 1992 Jun;10(4):12-9.

The role of the assessment nurse: one hospital's vision for meeting Joint 
Commission standards.

Rundio A Jr(1), Cericola D.

Author information:
(1)Shore Memorial Hospital, Somers Point, NJ.

In evaluating the progress made during one year, it is clear that the position 
of assessment nurse has been an extremely valuable, effective role. The staff 
nurses' perception is that they not only understand the importance of the 
nursing process more thoroughly, but they also view the role of nursing 
administration as that of trying to help the registered professional nurse at 
the bedside. It is key in today's health care climate that the nursing 
administrator be visible. One method to assure visibility is for staff to 
actually see a role model serving as an extension of the nurse administrator. If 
nurse administrators truly value the importance of the nursing process, then 
they need to ensure that this message is being communicated throughout the 
entire nursing service organization. Such an innovative position can function as 
a liaison between nursing management and the staff. There is no better method of 
communicating this than having someone who visibly echoes the values of the 
nurse administrator. It also should be noted here that Shore Memorial Hospital's 
Nursing Division received a perfect Joint Commission survey evaluation in April 
1990. The Nursing Division attributes this to the efforts made regarding 
implementation of the nursing process, and the forward thinking of a systems 
change with implementation of a computerized nursing information system that 
incorporates the nursing process with everyday documentation. Nurse 
administrators must effect change and demonstrate leadership within their 
respective organizations. Organizational change can be slow and difficult at 
times; however, the end result is worth the effort. It is important that the 
values of the nurse administrator be disseminated throughout the 
organization.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 10118935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Trop Med Int Health. 1999 Jan;4(1):58-71. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-3156.1999.00355.x.

Deriving meteorological variables across Africa for the study and control of 
vector-borne disease: a comparison of remote sensing and spatial interpolation 
of climate.

Hay SI(1), Lennon JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, UK. simon.hay@zoo.ox.ac.uk

This paper presents the results of an investigation into the utility of remote 
sensing (RS) using meteorological satellites sensors and spatial interpolation 
(SI) of data from meteorological stations, for the prediction of spatial 
variation in monthly climate across continental Africa in 1990. Information from 
the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) of the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) polar-orbiting meteorological satellites was 
used to estimate land surface temperature (LST) and atmospheric moisture. Cold 
cloud duration (CCD) data derived from the High Resolution Radiometer (HRR) 
on-board the European Meteorological Satellite programme's (EUMETSAT) Meteosat 
satellite series were also used as a RS proxy measurement of rainfall. 
Temperature, atmospheric moisture and rainfall surfaces were independently 
derived from SI of measurements from the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 
member stations of Africa. These meteorological station data were then used to 
test the accuracy of each methodology, so that the appropriateness of the two 
techniques for epidemiological research could be compared. SI was a more 
accurate predictor of temperature, whereas RS provided a better surrogate for 
rainfall; both were equally accurate at predicting atmospheric moisture. The 
implications of these results for mapping short and long-term climate change and 
hence their potential for the study and control of disease vectors are 
considered. Taking into account logistic and analytical problems, there were no 
clear conclusions regarding the optimality of either technique, but there was 
considerable potential for synergy.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3156.1999.00355.x
PMCID: PMC3272404
PMID: 10203175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Aust N Z J Public Health. 1996 Dec;20(6):657-60. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-842x.1996.tb01084.x.

Cold chain in a hot climate.

Guthridge SL(1), Miller NC.

Author information:
(1)Territory Health Services, Darwin.

We monitored the temperatures of batches of vaccine during transport and storage 
from a national warehouse to five Northern Territory vaccination clinics. 
Electronic temperature monitors were placed with vaccines, and were programmed 
to record the temperature every 30 minutes for up to three months. A diary was 
attached to each vaccine batch to record each change in location. The 
temperature recordings covered 8369 hours. There were regular temperature 
deviations outside the recommended range. In the hot climate of the Northern 
Territory, freezing is the greatest threat to vaccine potency. Recommendations 
from the study include: routine use of cold chain indicators, increased vaccine 
turnover and storage of vaccines within an operational temperature range of 4 to 
8 degrees C. Research is needed to investigate the efficacy of heat-stable 
vaccines when stored at ambient temperatures and in air-conditioned 
environments.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-842x.1996.tb01084.x
PMID: 9117976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 1999 Mar-Apr;73(2):199-207.

[The short-term effects of air pollution on mortality. The results of the EMECAM 
project in the city of Barcelona, 1991-1995. Estudio Multic√©ntrico Espa√±ol sobre 
la Relaci√≥n entre la Contaminaci√≥n Atmosf√©rica y la Mortalidad].

[Article in Spanish]

Saurina C(1), Barcel√≥ MA, S√°ez M, Tobias A.

Author information:
(1)Departament d'Economia, Universitat de Girona, Campus de Montilivi. 
csaurina@enterprise.udg.es

BACKGROUND: Most of the studies which demonstrate the existence of a short-term 
relationship between air pollution and morbidity and the Mortality analyze the 
impact of "classic" pollutants which are by-products of combustion. However, the 
changes in the sources of these emissions, shifting basically toward road 
traffic, has made a change in air pollution, heightening the importance of the 
photochemical components, such as ozone (O3) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). 
Barcelona is a city located in a mild climate zone, and its air pollution comes 
mainly from vehicle emissions. The main objective of this article is that of 
analyzing the relationship between the photochemical pollutants, NO2 and O3 and 
the death rate for different causes in the city of Barcelona throughout the 
1991-1995 period, using the procedure for analysis set out as part of the EMECAM 
Project.
METHODS: Daily changes in the number of deaths resulting from all causes, of the 
number of deaths for all causes of those over age 70, of the number of deaths 
resulting from cardiovascular diseases, and of the number of deaths resulting 
from respiratory-related causes are related to the daily changes in the 
photochemical pollutants using autoregressive Poisson models, controlling 
confusion-causing variables such as the temperature, the relative humidity, the 
systematic time structure and the autoregressive structure.
RESULTS: Except for the relationship between O3 and the mortality for causes 
involving respiratory diseases, the relationships between photochemical 
pollutants and the mortality for all the causes considered were statistically 
significant. The risks related to dying as a result of rises in O3 were greater 
than as a result of rises in NO2, almost triple among cardiovascular diseases. 
The risks related to dying for all the causes are lower than for specific causes 
and than for those individuals over age 70. The results of the analysis by 
six-month periods are quite similar to the overall results, revealing, in any 
event, relative risks somewhat greater during the warm months (May to October).
CONCLUSIONS: Photochemical pollution, especially that which is caused by O3, 
comprises a health risk. In the case of NO2, this might not be more than an 
indicators of the suspended particles or of other pollutants stemming from city 
traffic. There may be a certain adjustment between six-month periods of the 
impact of O3 on the mortality for causes of the circulatory system.

PMID: 10410602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Growth Change. 1986 Jan;17(1):37-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2257.1986.tb00931.x.

The metro rating game: what can be learned from the recent migrants?

Herzog HW, Schlottmann AM.

The authors examine nine indicators of quality of life in the 277 U.S. Standard 
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSAs) in terms of their impact on the decision 
to migrate. The factors considered were utilized in the 1985 publication "Places 
Rated Almanac" and include climate, housing, health care, crime, transportation, 
education, recreation, arts, and economics. "The purpose of this paper is both 
to analyze several alternative methods by which the nine 'Places Rated' 
indicators have been combined in previous studies, and to estimate a new system 
of weights for combining such indicators from a multivariate model of 
metropolitan out-migration." In this article, the authors examine out-migration 
of metropolitan households during the years 1975-1980. "Coefficient estimates 
from a multivariate model of out-migration form the basis for a ranking of 
metropolitan areas in the third section. Also included are comparisons among 
this and other studies of both the implicit weights employed against the 'Places 
Rated' scores...to derive both overall measures of urban life quality, and how 
such quality varies by city size."

excerpt

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-2257.1986.tb00931.x
PMID: 12267844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Acad Med. 1998 May;73(5):494-503. doi: 10.1097/00001888-199805000-00013.

Sustaining curricular change at Sherbrooke through external, formative program 
evaluations.

Des Marchais JE(1), Bordage G.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.

In this case study, the authors discuss external, formative program evaluation 
as a means to monitor and sustain ongoing curricular change and to prepare for 
periodic accreditation reviews. The Faculty of Medicine at Sherbrooke (in 
Quebec, Canada), following a major curricular reform begun in the mid-1980s, 
held three external, formative program evaluations in 1988, 1991, and 1994, 
using expert judgment and "connoisseur" models of evaluation. The authors 
present the goals of the evaluations (e.g., to evaluate the implementation of 
intended curricular changes) and the 17-step process used (e.g., "involve as 
many faculty and students as possible before and during the visit"), and 
describe the preparation for the evaluations, the selection of the external 
evaluators (e.g., a chief medical officer from the World Health Organization, a 
high-profile basic sciences teacher, the chairman of the previous accreditation 
team, and others), and on-site activities and reporting. Recommendations from 
the evaluators and the subsequent actions taken (and in a few cases, not taken) 
by the school are presented and discussed in terms of program planning, 
curricular content, basic sciences, problem-based learning and tutors' training, 
assessment of students, resource constraints, clerkships, community orientation, 
students' self-directedness, and medical humanism. The three evaluations helped 
guide and support the major curricular undertakings and encouraged continued 
changed and refinements. They also had a significant effect on the curriculum 
itself, on the faculty, and on the socioeducational climate of the school.

DOI: 10.1097/00001888-199805000-00013
PMID: 9609858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Lancet. 1991 Apr 20;337(8747):929-33. doi: 10.1016/0140-6736(91)91568-f.

Water supplementation in exclusively breastfed infants during summer in the 
tropics.

Sachdev HP(1), Krishna J, Puri RK, Satyanarayana L, Kumar S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, India.

Comment in
    Lancet. 1991 Jul 27;338(8761):251.

This study was designed to determine the need for water supplementation to 
maintain water homoeostasis in exclusively breastfed infants during summer in a 
tropical country. A prestudy questionnaire revealed that 97% of 34 nurses and 
63% of 70 doctors advocated such supplementation. 45 healthy, male, exclusively 
breastfed babies, aged 1-4 months, were recruited from a well-baby clinic. 9 who 
had never received supplemental water plus a random selection of 14 others were 
allocated to group I (breastmilk only); the remaining 22 infants were allocated 
to group II (breastmilk plus supplemental fluid according to the mother's usual 
practice). The babies were studied at the hospital for 8 h; breastmilk intake 
was measured by weighing the infant before and after each feed, water intake by 
calibrated bottles, and urine output by accurate collection and measurement. The 
maximum room temperatures were 34-41 degrees C and relative humidities 9-60% 
(below 50% in all but 3 infants). In group II the mean water intake was 11% (95% 
confidence interval 7-16%) of the total fluid intake. Both breastmilk intake 
(274 vs 210 ml) and total fluid intake (274 vs 233 ml) were higher in group I 
than in group II (p = 0.003, p = 0.073, respectively), after adjustment for age, 
weight, length, room temperature, and humidity. However, there were no 
significant differences between the groups in urine output, urine or serum 
osmolality, weight change, or rectal temperature whether or not the factors 
adjusted for included total fluid intake. Thus, exclusively breastfed infants do 
not need supplemental water to maintain water homoeostasis; a reduced breastmilk 
intake is a potential disadvantage of this practice.

DOI: 10.1016/0140-6736(91)91568-f
PMID: 1678028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Renkou Yanjiu. 1984 Nov 29;(6):21-6.

[Population development and changes of China's minority nationalities].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang T.

PIP: The People's Republic of China (PRC) is a nation composed of many ethnic 
groups. After the Communist victory of 1947, the government announced that there 
were 55 minority nationalities. The 1982 census provides demographic statistics 
concerning the position of those minorities within the population of the PRC. 
Since 1964, minority population has increased more rapidly than the population 
of the Han majority. Between 1953 and 1982, China's population increased 73.2%. 
The Han population increased 71.2%, the minorities, 90.4%. According to the 1982 
census, the total fertility rate of the village-dwelling minorities in 1981 was 
5.1%, while the fertility rate of the majority was 2.7%. The mortality rate of 
the various minorities decreased to the level of that of the Han. Consequently, 
the percentage of minorities in the total population also increased, from 5.8% 
of the total population in 1964 to 6.7% in 1982. The reasons for this increase 
include the following: the change in population reproduction brought about by 
democratic and socialist reform; the identification of minorities; improvement 
in health and medical facilities; the reinstatement of and change in racial 
minority policy promulgated in 1978; and intermarriage between minorities and 
Han Chinese. Although the minorities account for only 6.7% of China's total 
population, their distribution constitutes 62.5% of the nation's total area. In 
the past, the minorities have scattered to the various parts of the country and 
mingled with other ethnic groups. The high density of minorities is concentrated 
in the plains where the climate is mild and agricultural produce, such as wheat, 
rice, and corn, are cultivated. The lowest density areas with respect to the 
minorities are the inland highlands, deserts, and cold pastoral areas. The age 
structure of the minorities is young; the marriageable population is numerous; 
and the fertility rate is high. The educational standard of the minorities has 
been greatly enhanced, but is still lower than that of the Han Chinese.

PMID: 12159281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg B. 1981 Jan;172(4-5):323-31.

[On the evaluation of health factors in high-rise buildings. 2. 
Bioclimatological consequences resulting from comparative measurements of the 
air ionisation in a high-rise building located in a heavily contaminated 
suburban area and at certain altitudes (author's transl)].

[Article in German]

M√∂se JR, Fischer G.

According to accepted scientific theories inhaled small ions deliver their 
charges in the pulmonary alveoli and this leads to local recharges. This process 
stimulates structures of the central nervous system and the activity of the 
endocrine is excited, resulting in an enhancement of the general well-being. 
These possibilities of interpretation regarding a biological ionic effect are 
supported, with reservations (e.g. effects produced by a change in climate), by 
positive medical effects during and after a stay in a well-ventilated mountain 
climate or also in a sea-climate. Owing to their lower mobility the large ions 
are inhaled as small ions to an increasing extent. The chemical and physical 
noxa are delivered and deposited in the respiratory tract. They "stick" the 
epithelia in the trachea and in the bronchi as well as the endothelia in the 
lung vesicles. The number of the ciliary movements is reduced. Similar effects 
are known to be caused also by nicotine abuse. This results in a decreased 
ability of expectoration and a lower intake of oxygen by the alveoli. These 
facts could furnish an explanation for the increased vulnerability of city 
dwellers to infections diseases and to catarrh. The changed ionisation of air in 
urbanised areas (mainly large ions in high concentrations) definitely represents 
only one of the many risk factors. In addition to the attempt to characterize 
bioclimatically local weather conditions by means of the non-conventional 
parameter "air ionisation" our study has also been intended to establish 
biologically oriented criteria for the living in a high-rise building in a 
particularly unfavourable location. Under specific microclimatic conditions the 
uppermost storeys were at times bioclimatically favoured over the lowermost, 
especially when shallow air inversion is present. In such cases, small ions 
exclusively were registered in the upper storeys and large ions in the lower 
floors.

PMID: 7223138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Vnitr Lek. 1992 Aug;38(8):802-7.

[Climate therapy, rehabilitation and psychotherapy in bronchial asthma].

[Article in Slovak]

Hlinka V(1), Labus J.

Author information:
(1)Odborn√Ω liecebn√Ω √∫stav respiracn√Ωch chor√¥b, Nov√Ω Smokovec.

The authors explain the principle of effectiveness as regards treatment of 
bronchial asthma (AB) in the climate of the Tatra mountains. The most important 
place is held by elimination of noxious substances from the patient's 
environment which is comparable with the eliminations test. The second place is 
held by factors of a medium stimulating climate which calls for adaptation of 
the organism. This happens during the three-week acclimatization stage which 
acts as non-specific therapy. The result of climatotherapy is an increased 
immunological resistance, hardening, reduced bronchial hyperreactivity and 
improved life of asthmatic patients. Supplementary treatment comprises 
respiratory rehabilitation and psychotherapy. The aim of rehabilitation is 
active participation of the patient in treatment, adequate type of respiration 
and better tolerance of physical strain. The purpose of psychotherapy is to help 
the patient to overcome fear of AB, induce a change of lifestyle and regime. 
After comprehensive institutional treatment the patients are prepared for 
self-supporting ambulatory treatment. Under institutional conditions 
antiasthmatic treatment can be discontinued in as many as 24% of asthmatic 
patients and reduce substantially the administration of inhalatory 
beta-adrenergic substances, as demonstrated by the authors on 1725 asthmatic 
patients.

PMID: 1455764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Med Teach. 1989;11(1):17-25. doi: 10.3109/01421598909146272.

Educational development in an established medical school: facilitating and 
impeding factors in change at the Karolinska Institute.

M√•rtenson D.

Some of the factors facilitating and impeding educational development in an 
established and research-orientated medical school are briefly described. During 
the past 16 years, the Karolinska Institute has undergone a process of change 
from traditional forms of teaching and assessing, to more problem-orientated, 
integrated, and student-centered approaches. A new curriculum has been 
implemented with earlier patient contact and the introduction of new subjects of 
relevance for the health needs of today. These innovations could be regarded as 
modest, but what has been achieved positively is a climate increasingly in 
favour of change. Examples are the introduction of criteria for assessing 
teachers' competence for promotion, the establishment of an academic department 
for research and development in medical education, and discussions have been 
initiated on establishing a problem-based parallel track. The author's personal 
perceptions of events contributing to a climate favouring change constitute an 
integral part of this paper.

DOI: 10.3109/01421598909146272
PMID: 2747481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Schweiz Arch Neurol Psychiatr (1985). 1995;146(1):24-32.

[Status of the discussion regarding cost-effectiveness of community psychiatry 
and inpatient psychiatry].

[Article in German]

Brenner HD(1).

Author information:
(1)Sozialpsychiatrische Universit√§klinik Bern.

In the current climate of escalating health care costs and shrinking resources, 
higher priority is also being given to the relation between costs and benefits 
of reform efforts and further developments of existing service delivery systems 
in the field of mental health. Some proponents of community psychiatry have 
predicted in a pointed manner that a change in the allocation of resources in 
favor of community-based care would dramatically decrease the need for hospital 
beds, cost half as much and be clinically at least as efficacious as inpatient 
treatment. The author gives careful consideration to these postulates based on 
today's available literature and on his own experiences in Mannheim and in Bern. 
He presents an array of newer findings which places them in perspective and to 
some extent contradicts them as well. Recent studies on the effects of an 
expansion of outpatient treatment programs on the overall mental health delivery 
system suggest that in areas with already reasonably developed community 
services its further enhancement rarely has an effect on the number of 
admissions to and length of hospital stays. In addition, the postulate that 
community care is considerably less costly only holds if in- and outpatient 
facilities are not considered to be integral parts of a comprehensive system of 
mental health care which both serve different purposes. Accordingly, the 
question of the effectiveness of treatment must also be discussed very 
distinctively. Although a network of well-functioning community-based services 
is (not yet) a veritable alternative, it can by all means, however, serve as a 
useful counterpart to the intensive treatment offered in modern mental 
institutions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7792566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Environ Health Perspect. 1979 Dec;33:303-14. doi: 10.1289/ehp.7933303.

Thermal pollution consequences of the implementation of the president's energy 
message on increased coal utilization.

Parker FL.

The thermal consequences of coal utilization are most meaningfully assessed in 
comparison with the form of power generation replaced by coal which is most 
likely nuclear. The different effects are influenced by siting decisions and the 
intrinsic thermal efficiencies of the two fuel systems. Nuclear power plants 
discharge 50% more waste Rheat to the atmosphere through cooling towers or to a 
water body than coal-fired plants. Coal-fired plants require about 2/3 as much 
water as nuclear power plants. Nearly every property of water is affected 
nonlinearly by temperature, and biological effects may amplify these changes 
because protein denaturation takes place more rapidly above 30 degrees C and 
these high temperatures affect bactericidal and viricidal activity of chlorine 
compounds. Usually algal populations change from a dominance of diatoms and 
green algae to dominance by blue-green algae. All organisms experience elevated 
metabolic rates at higher temperatures which may affect total energy needs, 
foraging ability, reproduction, migration and susceptibility to disease. Intake 
structures inevitably draw many organisms into the cooling system of a power 
plant, but the number and kind are influenced by its location, configuration, 
and mode of operation. Use of water recirculation systems reduces water use and 
with it, the number of organisms entrained. Mechanical damage in the cooling 
system to small organisms is generally low, but fish and their larvae and eggs 
may be seriously damaged. Discharge effects may also be severe but are generally 
local. The near field, where there are strong shear velocities and rapid 
temperature changes are particularly stressful to fish, and stringent 
limitations on the timing and strength of discharges may be required to reduce 
these stresses to nondamaging levels. Off-stream cooling systems may increase 
cloudiness, ground fog, precipitation, temperature and local winds, but these 
effects generally extend no further than 1000 m even in winter. There is 
considerable potential for using condenser cooling water for agricultural and 
aquacultural purposes such as irrigation, frost protection, undersoil heating, 
greenhouse heating and climate control. However, over the next few decades 
little of this waste heat is likely to be used creatively. The thermal 
consequences of implementing NEP are locally serious but do not pose regional 
problems. Creative use of the waste heat for aquaculture, agriculture, 
cogeneration, and power for energy intensive industries can be a powerful means 
of mitigating undesirable effects.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.7933303
PMCID: PMC1638108
PMID: 540623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Health Libr Rev. 1992 Jun;9(2):62-5. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2532.1992.920062.x.

Responsibility for funding NHS library services.

Stewart D(1).

Author information:
(1)John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, England.

This paper is intended to contribute to discussion and debate on sources of 
funding for NHS library services which is a complex issue in the present climate 
of organizational change. Topics covered include the management and organization 
of services, the users, their requirements and sources of funding. In conclusion 
a number of specific issues that need addressing are raised.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2532.1992.920062.x
PMID: 10123796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. POPCEN Newsl. 1978 Jul-Aug;4(5):7-11.

An experiment in involvement of teachers in family welfare programme.

Kumar H, Kakrania SB.

PIP: Because teachers are highly respected in India, the Department of Family 
Welfare attempted to enlist their support for the family planning program by 
organizing training camps which offered a 2-day course on the population 
problem, preventive health services, contraceptive methods and the potential 
role of teachers in the program. This study collected and analyzed data on the 
demographic characteristics of one class of 50 trainees in Uttar Pradesh, their 
attitudes toward basic issues in family building before and after the course, 
their opinion of their training and the extent of their subsequent involvement 
in the family planning program. Data was obtained from questionnaires 
administered before and immediately after training and from a field survey 6 
months later. It was found that teachers were, in fact, often consulted by 
villagers about the Family Welfare Programme and that most of the teachers were 
familiar with local service facilities. After the course, there was an increase 
in the percentage of the teachers who favored later marriage and a limit of 2-3 
children spaced 5 years apart. The demographic characteristics of the sample and 
the change in attitudes are represented in tabular form. Most of the teachers 
considered themselves well-equipped by the course to participate in the 
Programme. However, a field survey of a small sample of trainees (4% of total 
trained), conducted 6 months later showed that none were actually involved in 
the program, partly because family planning personnel made no attempts to 
recruit them and partly because of the political climate against the Family 
Welfare Programme at the time. The teachers made no effort of their own to get 
involved. The article concludes that the course had effectively increased their 
knowledge but had not put sufficient emphasis on their role in the Family 
Welfare Programme.

PMID: 12157745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Milbank Mem Fund Q Health Soc. 1980 Summer;58(3):349-85.

Social and economic attitudes shaping American health policy.

Fein R.

The Health Clark Lectures (University of London) explore the development of 
American health care policy in a social and economic context; the probability of 
transatlantic relevance is substantial. I. American Health Care: Selected Policy 
Issues. The U.S. economy is beset with difficulties, and social policy bends to 
these realities and to perceptions of them. In the climate of growing 
neoconservatism, efforts to develop a coherent and cohesive national health 
policy are discontinuous and even inconsistent. II. Efficiency and Equity in 
Medicine: The Role of the Economist. The critical issue for economic policy is 
the amount spent for health care in society; for social policy it is the way 
that amount is shared. Certainly, there is an interplay between the two, but we 
must be wary of finding common ground in economic-investment and benefit-cost 
approaches. Striving for equity offers the best strategy to attain efficiency.

PMID: 6903793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Med War. 1992 Jul-Sep;8(3):185-99. doi: 10.1080/07488009208409045.

Effects of prolonged war and repression on a country's health status and medical 
services: some evidence from Iran 1979-90.

Willis EA(1), Taghipour J.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council, London, UK.

The decade following the Islamic revolution in Iran is surveyed from the point 
of view of the various ways in which the repressive policies of the new regime 
and, from September 1980, the war with Iraq affected health professionals, 
medical education and publishing, health services and living conditions. Sources 
consulted include publications from inside and outside the country, by 
apologists for and opponents of the regime, and a variety of commentators. 
Topics studied in more detail are the campaign against drug abuse, the cultural 
revolution in the universities, the country's leading English-language medical 
journal, wartime conditions, and the society in the aftermath of the conflict. 
As well as predating and outlasting the war, the unfavourable climate of 
repression is seen to have exacerbated its effects in many ways. The population 
has displayed considerable resilience in the face of overwhelming odds, but the 
overall picture cannot give much grounds for optimism with regard to either 
their physical or mental well-being in the future. Particular cause for concern 
is the profound damage and prolonged neglect sustained by the most basic 
preconditions for health and medical care.

DOI: 10.1080/07488009208409045
PMID: 1406467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Health Care Finance. 1995 Fall;22(1):1-42.

The coming changes in tax-exempt health care finance.

Carlile LL(1), Serchuk BM.

Author information:
(1)Kutak Rock, Denver, CO, USA.

On December 30, 1994, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) published proposed 
regulations (Proposed Regulations) that if enacted would significantly change 
the climate and rules of federal income tax law controlling the issuance and 
maintenance of tax-exempt bonds for governmental and 501(c)(3) health care 
borrowers. This article (1) summarizes the aspects of the Proposed Regulations 
dealing with private activity tests, management contracts, allocation and 
accounting rules, change in use of financed facilities, and antiabuse rules, and 
(2) summarizes the possible interrelationship of the IRS's audit program for 
tax-exempt bonds and the Proposed Regulations. The article reviews features of 
the Proposed Regulations that will affect either the costs or administrative 
burdens of managing the federal tax compliance of future tax-exempt health care 
borrowings.

PMID: 8528823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Tiers Monde. 1985 Jul-Sep;26(103):493-506.

[Migrations and economic and social change in Egypt].

[Article in French]

Ged A.

PIP: The inexistence in the Arab world of institutions to facilitate development 
led Egypt to adopt the infitah, a policy of economic opening which is not a 
voluntarist economic strategy but rather is intended to create a climate 
favorable to a more capitalistic orientation for individuals with access to 
petroleum income. Egypt's gross national product grew by 4.6%/year in the dozen 
years through 1965, but thereafter growth was sluggish or even negative. After 
1967 the choices of the dominant economic classes were oriented toward 
liberalism, and the arrival of Sadat allowed this orientation to prevail even 
before the infitah. The various measures of the infitah were designed to promote 
investment, reactivate the private sector, and reorganize the public sector. 
Most of the specific projects approved through 1978 were in the tertiary sector, 
they did little to stimulate further development, and the total number of jobs 
created was relatively insignificant. The transformation of the Egyptian economy 
is due not so much to the infitah as to 4 other elements: oil, income from the 
Suez canal, tourism, and emigration. At present petroleum represents 30% of 
Egypt's exports, the Suez canal will probably bring in $1.5 billion annually in 
coming years, and tourism brought in $1 billion in 1984, but in terms of 
economic and social impact on the total population emigration is much more 
important. The number of emigrants increased from 100,000 in 1973 to over 3 
million in 1984 and the extent of their remittances increased from $184 million 
in 1973 to nearly $4 billion at present. Serious shortages of skilled and 
unskilled labor have been created by the departure of 10-15% of the overall 
labor force and a higher proportion for some skilled professions. The number of 
workers in construction more than doubled from 1971-79, while 10% of the 
agricultural labor force departed. Agricultural wages increased by an average of 
7.1% in these years as agricultural workers were attracted to the higher wages 
of construction. However, the actual levels of agricultural wages were very low 
at outset. Differences between Egyptian wages and those paid in the Gulf states 
became so significant that they disrupted the prevailing norms and hierarchies 
of remuneration. The development of migration thus represents an individual 
response to 2 types of problems: the incapacity of the Egyptian state to develop 
an economy that creates employment, and the development of methods to allow each 
Arab state to benefit from petroleum income. But the future course of migration 
to the Gulf states is not known, and whether the improvements already observed 
in the lives of rural Egyptians can be sustained over the long term is a vital 
question.

PMID: 12280371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Dent. 1996 Jan-Mar;24(1-2):3-5. doi: 10.1016/0300-5712(95)00005-4.

Industry-university collaborations: a necessity for the future.

Davies RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Dental Health Unit, Manchester Science Park, UK.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this discussion document is to consider the potential 
benefits of collaborations between universities and industry. Universities and 
industry now exist in a harsh and competitive economic climate. Indeed, their 
very survival depends increasingly on their ability and willingness to adapt to 
an unprecedented pace of change. There are a number of compelling reasons for 
universities and industry to undertake collaborative research. The costs of 
research have escalated. Universities, of necessity, are increasingly seeking 
financial support from industry as conventional sources of funding have been 
systematically reduced. Companies can no longer be self sufficient in terms of 
the science and technology needed for success. The strength of universities is 
their science base, and industry recognizes that the rapid exploitation of 
scientific advances is the key to its survival. Both organizations can benefit 
from collaborative research programmes. Universities are able to make additional 
staff appointments which add to their intellectual resource and reputation. In 
addition the purchase of equipment enhances their infrastructure.
CONCLUSIONS: Industry has the opportunity to recognize the potential relevance 
and value of funded research and must harness and commercially exploit new 
knowledge as rapidly as possible. Ultimately such collaboration will give rise 
to new approaches to the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of dental diseases 
with benefits to all concerned.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-5712(95)00005-4
PMID: 8636489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Soc Welfare (India). 1976 Feb;22(11):4-6.

Organisational problems of motivation in family planning.

Acharji N.

Motivation -- a phenomenon of the human mind which is a product of purpose, 
desire, goal, perception, attitude and incentive, of emotions like anger, fear, 
or relationships of trust and suspicion, is an important organizational goal for 
implementing family planning. It must therefore concern itself with strategies 
of improvement of the recipient of the services through participation and proper 
communication techniques. After a need is generated, tension is created and a 
drive toward satisfaction begins. The organization must provide the alternatives 
of choosing an action which will help satisfaction of the individual and 
organizational needs harmoniously.

PIP: Attitude numbers among the complex phenomena of human motivation, and since 
attitude can be changed, motivation is possible by changing attitude. 
Organizational problems for motivation in family planning revolve around this 
cornerstone. The 2 parties to be motivated in family planning programs are the 
staff of the organization and the clients at whom family planning is aimed. An 
ideal is reached where there is identification of interest of the organization, 
the staff, and the clients. Socioeconomic, cultural, and psychological climate 
must be continually considered when assessing attitude; and clinets must be 
viewed in very human terms. Since the benefits of a restricted family size are 
not always recognized by the clients, organizational efforts should be directed 
to increase the strength of the desire for family planning. This desire will be 
determined by the probability and expectancy that smaller families will lead to 
other desirable outcomes. After desire and need is generated, tension is created 
and a drive toward satisfaction begins. Avoiding the use of force in family 
planning, the organization should adopt 3 strategies: 1) to whom is the program 
addressed; 2) what is the context of the program and what types of devices are 
to be used; and 3) how to achieve client cooperation implementing participation; 
communication; and a reward system. Resistance to change can be expected. It is 
essential that the staff have enough insight into human behavior and that the 
background of particular resistance be investigated. Communication must involve: 
1) listening with understanding; 2) a willingness to express and accept 
differing ideas; 3) locating opinion leaders within a community since rumors 
play an important role in communication; and 4) written or pictorial media. 
External rewards or sanctions have not been very effective. The principle of 
planned parenthood is yet to be internalized by the masses. This is an uphill 
task for the organization for family planning which must concern itself with 
strategies for involving the client.

PMID: 12229741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Indian J Malariol. 1997 Sep;34(3):140-63.

Geographical distribution and dramatic increases in incidences of malaria: 
consequences of the resettlement scheme in Gambela, SW Ethiopia.

Woube M(1).

Author information:
(1)Geographic Laboratory, Uppsala University, Sweden.

The spatial distribution of malaria results from the interaction between vector, 
parasite, host, physical and human environments. This basic geographical 
approach provides an illustration of the geographical distribution of malaria in 
the world, particularly in the tropical regions. Due to the global climate 
change and population movements, it is predicted that malaria could have a 
greater impact on the non-immune or unprepared populations in the Northern 
Hemisphere in the coming decades. Presently, Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is the 
most adversely affected region in the world. Like any other SSA country, 
Ethiopia suffers from both epidemic (unstable) and endemic (stable) malaria in 
the high and lowland regions, respectively. Gambela is one of the areas with 
stable malaria in the humid tropical region of the country. This study is based 
on observations, unpublished data, interviews and discussions with settlers and 
officials in Gambela. It is found that a degree of diverse malaria prevalence is 
associated with altitudinal, temperature and rainfall variations. Owing to the 
settlement and land-use changes, unexpected rainfall patterns, temperature 
increase, unstable political system and poverty, malaria has gone beyond its 
geographical limits. As a result, the number of malaria affected people has 
increased in the last 12 years. It is suggested that proper physical and social 
planning, understanding the geography, entomology, epidemiology, behaviour and 
life-cycle of malaria parasite, cooperation between the policy-makers, malaria 
specialists, neighbouring countries and international communities are urgent, if 
malaria has to be controlled and eradicated.

PIP: The spatial distribution of malaria results from the interaction between 
vector, parasite, host, physical, and human environments. No other region of the 
world is more adversely affected by malaria than sub-Saharan Africa. Like other 
sub-Saharan African countries, Ethiopia has both epidemic and endemic malaria in 
the high and lowland regions, respectively. Observations, interviews, and 
discussions were held with 200 resettlers and 40 indigenous inhabitants of 
Gambela, an area with stable malaria in the humid tropical region of the 
country. Findings on the spread of malaria in the area are based upon these 
observations and discussions, as well as unpublished data. A degree of diverse 
malaria prevalence was found to be associated with altitudinal, temperature, and 
rainfall variations. Due to settlement and land-use changes, unexpected rainfall 
patterns, temperature increase, an unstable political system, and poverty, 
malaria has spread beyond its geographical limits. The number of 
malaria-affected people has therefore increased over the past 12 years. Proper 
physical and social planning; knowledge of the geography, entomology, 
epidemiology, behavior, and life-cycle of the malaria parasite; and official and 
international cooperation are needed to control and eradicate malaria in this 
setting.

PMID: 9519570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Venereology. 1996 Jan-Mar;9(1):55-62.

Women's dreaming: women, sexuality and development.

Reid E.

PIP: This essay opens by invoking the dreams of women that arise from their life 
experiences and lead women, despite their powerlessness, to desire to create a 
different kind of society. The essay continues by exploring the relationship 
between analysis and practice and the contention that analysis of a problem 
shapes development practice, social policy, research priorities, and activism. 
Poverty provides an example of a complex, chaotic phenomenon that is often 
reduced to simplistic, measurable variables such as income or consumption 
deprivation. Attention is then paid to the population debate where linkages 
between the analytical framework and program development are clear. These 
simplified linkages led to macro analysis of events played out on the micro 
level and to the choice of women rather than men as the most effective change 
agents. The 1994 International Conference on Population and Development, 
however, gave rise to a new analytical framework emphasizing women's 
empowerment, women's health, women's rights, and men's participation and 
responsibility. This approach embraces the complexity of the situation and, 
thus, provides a road map for effective programs and policies. The next section 
of the essay considers gender analysis and how this concept leads to a demand on 
the part of women for access to men's privileges and a climate of confrontation 
arising from this demand. The inadequacies of using a woman-centered gender 
analysis as a framework for understanding male behavior are also discussed. 
Alternative concepts from the feminist movement are explored for their 
usefulness in generating social change, and the efforts of the Bangladesh Rural 
Achievement Committee to improve female literacy are used as an example of the 
value of cooperative, consciousness-raising groups. It is concluded that radical 
changes will be required to realize women's dreams of social changes.

PMID: 12291294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nurs Stand. 1992 Mar 18-24;6(26):36-7. doi: 10.7748/ns.6.26.36.s38.

Focus on Trent: management. Developing nurse management skills.

Parkin H.

Within a climate of change in the National Health Service and in recognition of 
the management function of nurses, Trent Region introduced a 'fast-track' 
development initiative to prepare nurses to fulfil new managerial roles. Two 
self-managed action learning programmes were conducted: one for nurses who would 
be functioning at clinical directorate or equivalent level, and another for 
those at executive board level. The author argues that the programme has proved 
itself as an enabling process for all of the participants.

DOI: 10.7748/ns.6.26.36.s38
PMID: 1562480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Med Law. 1996;15(3):417-24.

Trends in American medicine: problems for the defense expert.

Neiberg A.

American medicine is undergoing an unprecedented upheaval in its relationship 
with government, third party payers, business and professional groups, with its 
patients, and most of all within itself. These trends take the form of movements 
away from specialization which had been increasing until just recently; the 
introduction of practice criteria and practice guidelines; the virtual 
elimination of fee for service medicine; the creation of multiple physician 
health care organizations working in managed competition; and the grouping of 
doctors into provider organizations offering credit lines to health care 
systems. These trends, along with decreasing reliance on tissue diagnosis, 
declining support of medical research and ever-expanding health care teams have 
definite impact on the issue of negligence. The foregoing is an attempt to 
define these and to make some educated guesses as to their impact on health care 
delivery in the United States in the next several years and the ways in which 
the negligence climate is likely to change.

PMID: 9009591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Ingu munje nonjip. 1981 Dec;(5):17-34.

The role of family planning communications--an agent of reinforcement or change.

Chen EC.

PIP: Results are presented of a multiple classification analysis of responses to 
a 1972 KAP survey in Taiwan of 2013 married women aged 18-34 designed to 
determine whether family planning communication is primarily a reinforcement 
agent or a change agent. 2 types of independent variables, social demographic 
variables including age, number of children, residence, education, employment 
status, and duration of marriage; and social climate variables including ever 
receiving family planning information from mass media and ever discussing family 
planning with others, were used. KAP levels, the dependent variables, were 
measured by 2 variables each: awareness of effective methods and awareness of 
government supply of contraceptives for knowledge, wish for additional children 
and approve of 2-child family for attitude, and never use contraception and 
neither want children nor use contraception for practice. Social demographic and 
attitudinal variables were found to be the critical ones, while social climate 
and knowledge variables had only negligible effects on various stages of family 
planning adoption, indicating that family planning communications functioned 
primarily as a reinforcement agent. The effects of social demographic variables 
were prominent in all stages of contraceptive adoption. Examination of effects 
of individual variables on various stages of family planning adoption still 
supported the argument that family planning communications played a 
reinforcement role. Family planning communications functioned well in diffusing 
family planning knowledge and accessibility, but social demographic variables 
and desire for additional children were the most decisive influences on use of 
contraception.

PMID: 12222468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Sci Total Environ. 1992 Mar 31;113(3):229-50. doi: 10.1016/0048-9697(92)90003-b.

Strengthening the Montreal protocol: does it cool down the greenhouse?

den Elzen MG(1), Swart RJ, Rotmans J.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Protection, Bilthoven, 
The Netherlands.

Strengthening of the Montreal Protocol is recently being negotiated in London in 
1990 in order to achieve further reductions of the regulated CFCs and to include 
possibly more substances. In this article the implications of different policies 
with respect to control of ozone depleting substances for climate change are 
analysed, including the proposed substitution by HCFCs and HFCs, carbon 
tetrachloride and methylchloroform. A special halocarbon module was developed 
within the framework of RIVM's Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect 
(IMAGE). IMAGE is a parameterized science based policy model and has been 
developed to give policy agencies a concise overview of the quantitative aspects 
of the greenhouse problem, to evaluate various policy options concerning climate 
change and to serve as a means of communication. It is concluded, from 
simulations with the halocarbon module, that it is of primary importance to 
achieve a further reduction of the regulated CFCs compared to the Montreal 
Protocol with compliance by as many countries as possible. From the perspective 
of the greenhouse effect the inclusion of longer lived halocarbons, such as 
carbon tetrachloride and HCFC-22 in the protocol comes second. The application 
of methylchloroform, halons and HCFCs and HFCs with lower global warming 
potentials (GWPs) than HCFC-22 contributes only marginally to the greenhouse 
effect in comparison with the much more important greenhouse gases carbon 
dioxide, methane, ozone and nitrous oxide. Especially if further growth of the 
total production of HCFCs after complete replacement of the present CFCs can be 
avoided by using these alternatives with a lower GWP, these substances could 
therefore be tolerated in a transition period, from the perspective of global 
warming.

DOI: 10.1016/0048-9697(92)90003-b
PMID: 1519045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd. 1987 Sep 1;112(17):1005-11.

[Pathogen supply modified by environment and stage of production].

[Article in Dutch]

Tielen MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Stichting Gezondheidsdienst voor Dieren in Noord-Brabant, Boxtel.

Animal health status depends on the capability of the animals to resist the 
infection pressure of micro-organisms in the environment. This balance between 
resistance and infection pressure is very strongly influenced by farm and 
housing conditions. The infection pressure in the environment of the pigs is 
greatly reduced by good hygiene in the supply of feed and water, employment of 
the 'all in - all out' system with effective cleaning and disinfection between 
groups, and constant air change related to the age and weight of the animals. 
The resistance of the pigs is favourably influenced by a good vaccination 
strategy and a comfortable housing climate. Disease outbreaks are clearly 
reduced in houses with small separated compartments, consistent use of the 'all 
in-all out' system, and very high standard of climate control directed towards 
the requirements of the animals in each compartment.

PMID: 3672462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Caring. 1993 Sep;12(9):5, 7-8.

Reform must include home care & hospice.

Halamandaris VJ(1).

Author information:
(1)National Association for Home Care.

Inadequate access to acute health care and long-term care is the single most 
devastating problem facing America. This problem will only get worse unless 
prompt action is taken. Reform legislation must address the need for access both 
to basic health care coverage that includes home care and hospice services and 
to a comprehensive array of long-term care services based on home care. Without 
federal reform, health care costs will continue to increase while access to 
basic services and long-term care services deteriorates. Congress should make 
the most of the current climate of support for change and make health care 
reform a top priority for action next year.

PMID: 10128091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Adv Nurs. 1997 Jan;25(1):191-8. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.1997025191.x.

The practice-based context of educational innovation: nurse and midwife 
preparation in Scotland.

Veitch L(1), May N, McIntosh J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nursing and Community Health, Glasgow Caledonian University, 
Scotland.

The use of an illuminative approach to the national evaluation of the first 18 
months of Project 2000 nurse and pre-registration midwifery education in 
Scotland has facilitated the generation of data about the contexts in which the 
new programmes function. The aim of this paper is to present some of the data 
generated from programme participants about the conditions students experience 
in practice-based learning experiences. The reported issues are direct or 
indirect effects of policy initiatives and service reforms. The current climate 
of change in health care provision has fostered a limited number of developments 
which are consistent with the aspirations of the new programmes and which offer 
highly valued learning experiences to students. More often however the reforms 
have served to frustrate the intent of the programmes to offer students 
experiences which are patient-centred, holistic-care and health oriented.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.1997025191.x
PMID: 9004029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Nurs Times. 1994 Apr 27-May 3;90(17):39-42.

Community nurse attitudes to the clinical nurse specialist.

Griffiths J, Luker K.

At a time of unprecedented change in community nursing, it is appropriate to 
revisit the role of specialist and generalist nurses in community nursing teams. 
The data presented here are from a study of 130 home visits of 16 district 
nurses; the methods of data collection were participant observation and in-depth 
interview. Findings reflect a climate in which a substantial proportion of the 
community nurses' traditional role has been redefined as being the work of 
social services carers. There is a desire to become more involved in each area 
of community nursing work as the management of pain, diabetes and stoma care 
which, although common everyday activities, have increasingly been taken on by 
the clinical nurse specialist.

PMID: 8177792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Clin Exp Allergy. 2000 Mar;30(3):418-25. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2222.2000.00761.x.

Window pane condensation and high indoor vapour contribution - markers of an 
unhealthy indoor climate?

Emenius G(1), Korsgaard J, Wickman M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Stockholm County Council, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate whether window pane 
condensation and indoor vapour contribution >/= 3 g/m3 could be used as 
indicators of defective air change rate, high indoor humidity and high mite 
allergen concentration in mattress dust.
METHODS: Actual ventilation rate, indoor temperature, air humidity (AIH/RH) and 
concentrations of mite allergen were measured in 59 houses and compared with 
received outdoor temperatures and air humidity. Indoor vapour contribution 
defined as the difference between the indoor and the outdoor vapour 
concentration was calculated. Sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and 
accuracy were calculated for window pane condensation and high vapour 
contribution (>/= 3 g/m3), as indicators of defective ventilation (< 0.5 ACH), 
high indoor humidity (>/= 7 g/kg and >/= 45% RH) and high mite allergen 
concentration in mattress dust (>/= 2 microg/g).
RESULTS: All houses with high humidity and high mite allergen concentrations 
were positive for the two indicators (high sensitivity), but with a specificity 
of only 50% so that half of the houses with reported condensation and high 
vapour contribution turned out to be low pollution houses with adequate high 
ventilation levels. Both indicators had high negative predictive values and 
absence of the two indicators almost certainly (97-100%) excluded high indoor 
pollution with high humidity and high mite concentrations. Overall more than 70% 
of the dwellings were correctly classified by the two indicators.
CONCLUSION: Absence of window pane condensation on double-glazed windows and low 
indoor vapour contribution (< 3 g/m3) during the winter are true markers of a 
dwelling without high indoor air humidity and without high mite allergen 
concentrations in mattress dust in houses in a cold temperate climate with 
subzero outdoor temperatures. The presence of the two indicators is associated 
with a 18-45% risk of high humidity and mite allergen concentrations so in this 
latter group further measurements are needed for correct classification.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2222.2000.00761.x
PMID: 10691902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Health Prog. 1993 Jun;74(5):25-9.

Retaining nurses through conflict resolution. Training staff to confront 
problems and communicate openly can improve the work climate.

Fowler AR Jr(1), Bushardt SC, Jones MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Management, Youngstown State University, OH.

The way nurses resolve conflict may be leading them to quit their jobs or leave 
the profession altogether. Conflict is inevitable in a dynamic organization. 
What is important is not to avoid conflict but to seek its resolution in a 
constructive manner. Organizational conflict is typically resolved through one 
of five strategies: withdrawal, force, conciliation, compromise, or 
confrontation. A recent study of nurses in three different hospitals showed that 
the approach they use most is withdrawal. This might manifest itself in a 
request to change shifts or assignments and may lead to a job change and, 
eventually, abandonment of the field altogether. Given this scenario, changing 
nurses' conflict resolution style may help administrators combat the nursing 
shortage. Healthcare organizations must examine themselves to determine why 
nurses so frequently use withdrawal; then they must restructure work 
relationships as needed. Next, organizations need to increase nurses' awareness 
of the problem and train them to use a resolution style more conducive to 
building stable relationships: confrontation. Staff should also be trained in 
effective communications skills to develop trust and openness in their 
relationships.

PMID: 10126220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J N Y State Nurses Assoc. 1996 Dec;27(4):16-9.

Educational innovation in a time of change.

Cook SS(1), Manley MJ.

Author information:
(1)Columbia University School of Nursing, New York, USA.

At Columbia University School of Nursing, excellence in clinical practice has 
always been a major mission. The upheaval and rapid change in the current health 
care climate make meeting this goal difficult, especially in implementing 
educational innovations which might better prepare students for the practice 
world. This article explores the market forces, professional issues, and 
collaborative interactions that create both positive and negative influences on 
educational innovation.

PMID: 9060714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Arctic Med Res. 1992;51 Suppl 7:92-3.

Work in the cold--an information and research program in occupational health.

Dahlstr√∂m G(1).

Author information:
(1)Swedish Foundation for Occupational Health, Kiruna.

Hundreds of thousands of employees work in the cold. The problems concerning 
cold are, to a great extent, well known. There are also good suggestions about 
how to deal with these problems. This project deals with: Cold stress, as an 
important risk factor for medical illness; the problems concerning clothing and 
equipment; how to change the snowmobile into a modern low risk piece of 
equipment: international standardization usable in the field; different 
approaches for information to reach and be used by the workers and their chiefs.

PMID: 1285826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Int J Biometeorol. 1998 Dec;42(2):77-83. doi: 10.1007/s004840050088.

Biometeorological classification of daily weather types for the humid tropics.

Lecha Estela LB(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro Provincial de Meteorolog√≠a, Cienfuegos, Cuba.

This paper describes the methodology for an objective classification of weather 
types for biometeorological purposes in a tropical-humid climate, such as the 
Cuban climate. The classification considers the daily behavior of extreme air 
temperatures, the mean partial vapor pressure, the mean diurnal cloudiness, the 
wind speed at 1300 hours local time, and the occurrence of precipitation during 
the day, in order to identify up to 18 weather types. Descriptions are given of 
the main biometeorological characteristics of some significant weather types, 
considering typical geographical locations, and their seasonal variations 
related to the seasonal pattern of asthma and acute respiratory infections. The 
relationship between the daily occurrence of diseases and the distribution of 
these local weather types is also described. A significant relationship was 
found between the incidence of cardiovascular and neurological diseases and the 
occurrence of hot stress, while the presence of cold and very cold days was 
closely related with increases of bronchial asthma in adults and children. The 
appearance of large meteoropathological reactions in the native population could 
be explained by the day to day pattern of change in the weather types.

DOI: 10.1007/s004840050088
PMID: 9923199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Caring. 2000 Nov;19(11):38-40.

The advanced practice nurse & home care.

Craven RF(1), Keene TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biobehavioral Nursing, University of Washington School of 
Nursing, Seattle, Washington, USA. ruthc@uwashington.edu

Home care providers are experiencing higher acuity of patients in a climate of 
restricted reimbursement for care. This results in an increased need to develop 
more efficient systems and to employ staff with expert skills. One way to fill 
this need is to use nurses with advanced preparation at a graduate-degree level. 
However, Medicare regulations must change before patients and providers can take 
advantage of these professionals in the home care setting.

PMID: 11151562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1995 Jul;119(7):600-1.

Commentary on the future of pathology practice in the United States.

Shalowitz J(1).

Author information:
(1)Health Services Management Program, Kellogg Graduate School of Management, 
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

The rapidly changing climate of health care delivery threatens the traditional 
control pathologists have had over their profession. However, new opportunities 
have been created. The strength of articles such as those by Sodeman and 
Elevitch is found not only in their content, but also in the impetus they 
provide for continuing the forum for discussion of change of the profession's 
future role in our health care system.

PMID: 7625899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Clin Lab Sci. 1995 Nov-Dec;8(6):339-42.

Cost accounting applied to the clinical laboratory.

Rinker G(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pathology Laboratories, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta 
30912-3620, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review cost accounting procedures and the applications for the 
clinical laboratory.
DATA SOURCES: Laboratory management textbooks, journal articles, and symposium 
speakers; NCCLS Guidelines; and personal experiences.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Costs in the laboratory fall into several categories: direct, 
indirect, fixed, and variable. In calculating costs of various tests, all costs 
must be estimated and included; when prices or wages change, the impact on total 
costs can then be assessed quickly and accurately. Computer software is 
available to help with collection and manipulation of data.
CONCLUSION: Being able to determine the cost of a laboratory procedure is 
important in the economic climate of today. A formet for collecting cost 
components is given and its use discussed.

PMID: 10163342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Kardiologiia. 1991 Mar;31(3):8-10.

[Possibility of correcting atherogenic dyslipoproteinemia by the mountain 
climate treatment].

[Article in Russian]

Mirrakhimov MM, Aƒ≠tbaev KA, Murataliev TM, Kim NM.

Whether dyslipoproteinemias can be corrected with 24-day mountain therapy in a 
mid-mountainous area (the village of Malinovka, 1600 m above the sea-level) was 
studied in 225 males who had sustained large myocardial infarction. The 
posthospital rehabilitation of postinfarction patients in a mid-mountainous 
sanatorium caused a substantial change in blood lipoprotein composition, which 
were generally antiatherogenic. The antiatherogenic changes in blood lipoprotein 
composition retained within 10 months after their stay at the sanatorium, which 
indicates that mid-mountain climate is a promising tool for non-drug prevention 
and correction of atherogenic dyslipoproteinemias.

PMID: 1831520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Health Millions. 1993 Feb;1(1):9-12.

All in a day's work -- women of village Kamad.

Devi L, Devi Y, Mendhapurkar S.

PIP: The conditions of rural women in villages of Kamad, Dhandi, Kumarkot, and 
Brahmpuri in Uttar Pradesh in India are revealed in the responses of 3 women to 
questions about their life. Improvement in women's conditions can be 
accomplished by empowerment; the women agreed that having women's groups and 
open discussion would help women stand up to their husbands who beat them or 
take their money. Conversations with the women were initially blocked by the 
village men, but after 5 months, dialogues were conducted. The conversations 
reflect very labor-intensive activity every day regardless of the season. Jungle 
surrounds the villages and the climate is harsh with both monsoons and snow. Men 
do not care for their women very well, and health and reproductive functions are 
neglected. The women are hopeful that things will change. Minu Devi explained 
that she was bought for Rs.5000 by her husband when she was 6-7 years old, but 
most now marry at 12-14 years and the girl's father is paid Rs.20,000-30,000. 
The work day is 18-20 hours. If the husband is disobeyed or the wife refuses to 
work, the husband tells his wife that he has the right to beat her. Minu's first 
child was born when she was 13-14, but died within hours. There was no 
understanding of prenatal or postnatal care. The practice of childbirth was 
described: living in the cattle house on a bed of paddy husks, and giving birth 
with the help of a Dai. The mother cuts the umbilical cord with a sickle and 
heats water to bathe herself and baby. Cooking, squatting, and washing clothes 
are all performed in the cattle house. A ration of rice and ghee is provided. 
After 24 hours, the mother must walk to a crossroads and throw away the birth 
remains and bathe within 3 days. On day 5 she is allowed to go to the river to 
wash clothes. Others may not touch her clothes and her path is sprinkled with 
cow urine. Day 11 brings with it some salt for the rice portion. Thereafter she 
may move to another room although still without bedding. A boy baby is given a 
shirt after 1 month, a girl, after 6 months . Her required chores resume. Minu's 
sister gave birth to a girl and became ill; her husband refused to get her 
medicine and she and the baby died.

PMID: 12286357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Int J Nurs Stud. 1994 Oct;31(5):421-36. doi: 10.1016/0020-7489(94)90013-2.

Some factors associated with change in patient-centredness of student nurses 
during the Common Foundation Programme in Nursing.

Rolfe G(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Health Studies, University of Portsmouth, U.K.

This longitudinal study examines the changes in patient-centredness of a group 
of student nurses during their Common Foundation Programme in Nursing, and 
attempts to explore some of the social, psychological and educational factors 
which might be associated with such change. The Patient-centredness Multi-choice 
Questionnaire (PMQX) was administered to a sample of 267 student nurses on 
commencement and completion of their Common Foundation Programme in Nursing, and 
significant positive as well as negative changes in PMQX scores were found, 
although the mean scores for the sample were unchanged. A number of factors were 
found to be associated with high levels of patient-centredness on commencement 
of the course, including marital status, age, and radicalism. Positive change in 
patient-centredness during the CFP was associated with a variety of variables 
such as class size, a student-centred climate and a tenderminded attitude. Other 
factors, such as psychological stability and extroversion, were associated with 
both increase and decrease in patient-centredness during the CFP.

DOI: 10.1016/0020-7489(94)90013-2
PMID: 7989168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Int J Eat Disord. 1993 Dec;14(4):387-401. doi: 
10.1002/1098-108x(199312)14:4<387::aid-eat2260140402>3.0.co;2-9.

Managed care and mental health: the silencing of a profession.

Wooley SC(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, OH.

Rapid change in the organization and financing of health care has created a 
bewildering and threatening climate for psychotherapists. Fearful of exclusion 
from preferred provider and health maintenance organizations, and aware that 
patient advocacy is interpreted as antagonism to these organizations' goals, 
many therapists have fallen silent, acquiescing to practices they do not 
support. Crystallization of these practices into policy and law is now imminent. 
It is crucial that therapists reclaim their authority, speaking out on behalf of 
current and future patients as well as the concealed constituency of 
historically disenfranchised persons for whom psychotherapy has provided a 
voice.

DOI: 10.1002/1098-108x(199312)14:4<387::aid-eat2260140402>3.0.co;2-9
PMID: 8293021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Am J Public Health. 1999 Jun;89(6):938-44. doi: 10.2105/ajph.89.6.938.

Great expectations: historical perspectives on genetic breast cancer testing.

Lerner BH(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for the Study of Society and Medicine, Columbia University, New York, 
NY 10032, USA. BHL5@columbia.edu

Women who test positive for a genetic breast cancer marker may have more than a 
50% chance of developing the disease. Although past screening technologies have 
sought to identify actual breast cancers, as opposed to predisposition, the 
history of screening may help predict the societal response to genetic testing. 
For decades, educational messages have encouraged women to find breast cancers 
as early as possible. Such messages have fostered the popular assumption that 
immediately discovered and treated breast cancers are necessarily more curable. 
Research, however, has shown that screening improves the prognosis of some--but 
not all--breast cancers, and also that it may lead to unnecessary interventions. 
The dichotomy between the advertised value of early detection and its actual 
utility has caused particular controversy in the United States, where the 
cultural climate emphasizes the importance of obtaining all possible medical 
information and acting on it. Early detection has probably helped to lower 
overall breast cancer mortality. But it has proven hard to praise aggressive 
screening without exaggerating its merits. Women considering genetic breast 
cancer testing should weight the benefits and limitations of early knowledge.

DOI: 10.2105/ajph.89.6.938
PMCID: PMC1508642
PMID: 10358693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Am J Community Psychol. 1979 Feb;7(1):31-43. doi: 10.1007/BF00893161.

Student physical symptoms and the social climate of college living groups.

Moos RH, Van Dort B.

Student physical symptoms were related to the social climates of university 
living groups. A Physical Symptom Risk Scale, a new subscale of the University 
Residence Environment Scale, which relates consistently to physical symptom 
complaints for male, female, and coed living groups, was developed. Living 
groups characterized by high student physical symptoms were perceived by 
students as low in involvement and support, high in competition, and low in 
student influence. The results indicate that certain types of social 
environments may be "high risk" settings in that they support and possibly 
facilitate complaints of physical symptoms. These settings may be amenable to 
early "environmental diagnosis," preventive counseling, and change-oriented 
social systems intervention.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00893161
PMID: 453122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Nurs Econ. 1996 Jul-Aug;14(4):241-4.

The professional salary model: meeting the bottom lines.

Borromeo AR, Windle PE, Eagen MK.

The challenge for two units of St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital in Houston, Texas 
was to achieve quality and financial viability while maintaining staff 
satisfaction. The situation imposed by the current health care climate, with its 
emphasis on reducing costs while maintaining quality and productivity, mandated 
a change in the compensation structure. The Professional Salary Model was 
piloted on two units and refined along the way to ensure that the model, as 
practiced, met the staff's needs. Evaluation of the program revealed that the 
goals of quality, productivity, financial viability, and staff satisfaction were 
achieved.

PMID: 8826313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Dent Educ. 1980 Jun;44(6):309-12.

Departments of social dentistry--an update for the 1980s.

Waldman HB, Siegel SE.

Two decades have passed since Blackerby's call to develop departments of social 
dentistry within dental schools. Recent events, having changed the climate for 
the delivery of health services, would seem to bear out the wisdom of such 
departments. A review of the development and present status of departments of 
social dentistry is provided with a discussion of evolving programs and need for 
a change in the relationship between departments of social dentistry and the 
general school teaching programs.

PMID: 6929303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Oecologia. 2000 Aug;124(2):299-308. doi: 10.1007/s004420000385.

Morphotype community structure of ectomycorrhizas on Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga 
menziesii Mirb. Franco) seedlings grown under elevated atmospheric CO(2) and 
temperature.

Rygiewicz PT(1), Martin KJ(2), Tuininga AR(3).

Author information:
(1)US Environmental Protection Agency, National Health and Environmental Effects 
Research Laboratory, 200 SW 35th Street, Corvallis, OR 97333, USA e-mail: 
rags@mail.cor.epa.gov Tel.: +1-541-7544702, Fax: +1-541-7544799, , , , , , US.
(2)Dynamac Corporation, National Health and Environmental Effects Research 
Laboratory, 200 SW 35th Street, Corvallis, OR 97333, USA, , , , , , US.
(3)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
OR 97331, USA, , , , , , US.

Mycorrhizas alter the acquisition of carbon and nutrients, thereby affecting 
numerous plant and ecosystem processes. It is important, therefore, to determine 
how mycorrhizal populations will change under possible future climate 
conditions. Individual and interactive effects of elevated atmospheric CO2 
concentration and atmospheric temperature were assessed in a 2√ó2 factorial 
design [ambient and elevated (200 ppm above ambient) CO2 concentrations, and 
ambient and elevated (4¬∞C above ambient) temperatures]. In June 1993, 2-year-old 
Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii Mirb. Franco) seedlings were planted in 12 
environment-tracking chambers (n=3) containing reconstructed, low-nitrogen, 
native forest soil. Climate treatments were imposed shortly thereafter, and the 
seedlings grew until June 1997. Soil cores were taken twice per year during the 
exposure period. We present findings on changes in the community structure of 
ectomycorrhizal (ECM) root tips, categorized into morphotypes using gross 
morphological traits. A diverse and stable community of morphotypes (a total of 
40) was encountered; no more than 30 of which were seen at any sampling time. In 
the first sample, there were only 15 morphotypes found in the 12 chambers. 
Morphotype numbers increased during the first half of the experiment, remaining 
fairly constant thereafter. Near the end of the exposure, elevated-temperature 
treatments maintained more morphotypes than ambient treatments. However, 
overall, absolute measures (number of ECM tips) were affected primarily by CO2 
treatment, whereas proportional measures (e.g., Simpson's index) were affected 
primarily by temperature. While some morphotypes were negatively affected 
seasonally by higher temperatures (putative Rhizopogon group), others 
(Cenococcum) seemed to thrive. Underlying the dominant patterns of change in 
diversity, driven by the Rhizopogon group, subdominant populations responded 
slightly differently. Community diversity through time tended to increase at a 
greater rate for all subdominant populations compared with the rate when 
dominant populations were included.

DOI: 10.1007/s004420000385
PMID: 28308191


308. Fieldstaff Rep West Eur Ser. 1974 Dec;9(5):1-10.

The World Food Conference: population growth and the earth's food problem.

Cottam G.

PIP: The World Food Conference, originally proposed by President Boumedienne of 
Algeria in September 1973, was held in Rome in 1974. Having in mind the lack of 
results from the Population Conference in Bucharest which immediately preceded 
this conference, the delegates disregarded the population issue. And, by 
ignoring the fact that food need = per capita consumption x number of people, 
the Conference could not adequately deal with its task. Increased world food 
production in recent years has been all but eaten up by increasing worldwide 
population. There are 3 grave dangers to continued increases in food production: 
1) the new high yield varieties of grains are more vulnerable to crop failure; 
2) the energy shortage will have an impact on recently introduced 
energy-intensive practices in agriculture; and 3) there is evidence of a 
changing world climate. At the Conference, the poor countries asked for help, 
the communist countries blamed imperialistic capitalism for the food problem, 
and the developed countries listed the contributions they were currently making. 
Organizational aspects of the Conference are mentioned as well as the 
resolutions dealt with. A weak resolution on population was approved whereby 
rational population policies were encouraged with the right of couples to 
determine the number and spacing of their own children reserved.

PMID: 12261868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Int Nurs Rev. 2000 Jun;47(2):97-105. doi: 10.1046/j.1466-7657.2000.00011.x.

Pay equity and nursing in Ontario: ten years later.

Schreiber RS(1), Nemetz E.

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, University of Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. 
rschreib@uvic.ca

'Nurses have never been compensated in accordance with their central role in 
health care' (Schreiber 1994), reflecting the generalized and well-documented 
under-valuing of the work of women (Schreiber 1993). Pay equity legislation, 
passed in Ontario, Canada in 1987, designed to correct gender wage 
discrimination, created great optimism that the under-valuing of nurses' work 
might be ending. Nonetheless, this has not been the case, as the social, 
political, and economic climate has not kept pace with the speed and enormity of 
social change necessary to enact the intent of the legislation. Indeed, gains in 
nurses' wages have been directly offset by significant lay-offs. In this paper, 
we examine the issues surrounding the implementation of pay equity legislation 
in Ontario, Canada, along with analysis and implications of these issues, drawn 
from 10 years of experience. In addition, we highlight lessons that can be 
learned from the Ontario experience.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1466-7657.2000.00011.x
PMID: 10884179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Hosp Community Psychiatry. 1979 Feb;30(2):125-8. doi: 10.1176/ps.30.2.125.

Hospitals in the 1980s: service, training, and research.

Glick ID, Hargreaves WA.

Several factors press for change in the psychiatric hospital of the 1980s, 
including knowledge obtained from recent controlled studies of outcome of 
different approaches and length of hospital stay, changes in the 
social-political-economic climate, and new methods of organizing the delivery of 
services. In the proposed model of inpatient treatment, the primary use of 
hospitalization will be for brief treatment (three to 21 days). For a very small 
subgroup, longer hospitalization may be needed. The hospital will also be used 
for triage and disposition of persons with a broad range of problems, which will 
rarely take more than three days. Complementary changes will be required in 
training and research; a promising training model may be continuous care teams 
by which trainees can manage chronic, multiproblem patients through different 
levels of care within and outside the hospital. Research must move to the 
out-of-hospital settings if the new patterns of care are to be understood and 
improved.

DOI: 10.1176/ps.30.2.125
PMID: 759290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1989 Jul 15;195(2):207-11.

Risk factors for lower respiratory tract disease in a cohort of feedlot cattle.

Alexander BH(1), MacVean DW, Salman MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health, College of Veterinary Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins 80523.

Using data collected from company lot records, potential risk factors related to 
feedlot management, the cattle, and climate were determined. The risk factors 
were analyzed by use of weighted multiple regression techniques to determine 
their effects on the incidence of lower respiratory tract disease in a cohort of 
95 lots containing 17,696 cattle. The gender of the cattle, the number of days 
that groups of cattle filled a lot, pregnancy checking of heifers, and the 
average temperature change in the first 14 days in which the cattle were on feed 
significantly influenced the incidence of lower respiratory disease. The 
incidence of lower respiratory tract disease was most influenced by risk factors 
in the first 30 days on feed.

PMID: 2768036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Nerv Ment Dis. 1998 Feb;186(2):96-103. doi: 10.1097/00005053-199802000-00005.

Determinants of the treatment climate in psychiatric and substance abuse 
programs: implications for improving patient outcomes.

Timko C(1), Moos RH.

Author information:
(1)Center for Health Care Evaluation, Veterans Affairs Health Care System, Palo 
Alto, California, USA.

This study examined determinants of the treatment climate in 89 psychiatric and 
substance abuse programs. Clearer policies giving patients more control, and 
more health and treatment services, were related to more supportive, autonomous, 
expressive, and practically oriented milieus. In contrast, more policy choice 
and daily living assistance were associated with less support, personal 
expression, and practical orientation. Programs in which staff had more 
paraprofessionals and better team functioning, and in which patients had more 
social resources and better mental functioning, tended to be more supportive and 
to have more emphasis on autonomy, personal expression, and practical 
orientation. Based on these results, we suggest some guidelines on how to change 
the treatment milieu to benefit patients' adjustment.

DOI: 10.1097/00005053-199802000-00005
PMID: 9484309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


313. BMJ. 1998 Feb 14;316(7130):514-8. doi: 10.1136/bmj.316.7130.514.

Winter mortality and cold stress in Yekaterinburg, Russia: interview survey.

Donaldson GC(1), Tchernjavskii VE, Ermakov SP, Bucher K, Keatinge WR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Basic Medical Sciences, Queen Mary and Westfield 
College, University of London.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate how mortality and protective measures against exposure 
to cold change as temperatures fall between October and March in a region of 
Russia with a mean winter temperature below -6 degrees C.
DESIGN: Interview to assess factors associated with cold stress both indoors and 
outdoors, to measure temperatures in living room, and to survey unheated rooms.
SETTING: Sverdlovsk Oblast (district), Yekaterinburg, Russia.
SUBJECTS: Residents aged 50-59 and 65-74 living within approximately 140 km of 
Yekaterinburg in Sverdlovsk Oblast. Survey of sample of 1000 residents equally 
distributed by sex and age groups.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Regression analysis was used to relate data on indoor 
heating and temperatures, the amount of clothing worn, the amount of physical 
activity, and shivering while outside, to outdoor temperature; results were 
compared with mortality patterns for ischaemic heart disease, cerebrovascular 
disease, respiratory disease, and mortality from all causes.
RESULTS: As mean daily temperatures fell to 0 degree C the amount of clothing 
worn outdoors increased, physical activity while outdoors became more 
continuous, and only 11 (6.6%) of the 167 people surveyed who went outdoors at 
temperatures above 0 degree C reported shivering. The mean temperature in living 
rooms in the evening remained above 21.9 degrees C. Mortality from ischaemic 
heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, respiratory disease, and all causes did 
not change. As the temperature fell below 0 degree C the number of items of 
clothing worn plateaued at 16.0 and the number of layers at 3.7. With regression 
analysis, shivering outdoors was found to increase progressively to 34.6% (P < 
0.001) of excursions at -25 degrees C, and mortality (after declining slightly) 
rose progressively (all cause mortality rose by 1.15% for each 1 degree C drop 
in temperature from 0 degree C to -29.6 degrees C, 95% confidence interval 0.97% 
to 1.32%). 94.2% of bedrooms were directly heated, and evening temperatures in 
the living room averaged 19.8 degrees C even when outside temperatures reached 
-25 degrees C.
CONCLUSIONS: Outdoor cold stress and mortality in Yekaterinburg increased only 
when the mean daily temperature dropped below 0 degree C. At temperatures down 
to 0 degree C cold stress and excess mortality were prevented by increasing the 
number of items of clothing worn and the amount of physical activity outdoors in 
combination with maintaining warmth in houses.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.316.7130.514
PMCID: PMC2665668
PMID: 9501713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Adolesc Med. 1994 Oct;5(3):397-404.

The Challenges of Change: Conducting an Environmental Opportunity Analysis for 
Medical Practices.

Miller EK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Management, College of Business, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.

The current climate of health care reform reinforces the need for physicians to 
consider the various factors that ensure sustained success in their practice. 
The author outlines the steps required for an accurate environmental opportunity 
analysis and discusses the appropriate organizational responses.

PMID: 10358284


315. Nurs Times. 1996 Jul 10-16;92(28):37-9.

The development of leadership skills in clinical practice.

Sams D.

Leadership is often seen as the province of the manager. However, as the NHS 
changes and responsibility is increasingly devolved, practitioners at all levels 
are expected to lead change and innovation. In this paper the author describes 
how attending the Leadership in Nursing for the Community (LINC) programme has 
influenced her practice. As a result of the programme she has an increased 
awareness of her own leadership role and of the political and professional 
climate in which she works.

PMID: 8718079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Adolesc Health. 1999 Aug;25(2):97. doi: 10.1016/s1054-139x(99)00069-5.

Age and seasonal distribution of menarche in Korean girls.

Park SH, Shim YK, Kim HS, Eun BL.

PIP: This paper examines the menarchal age of Korean girls and its monthly 
distribution to define the possible relationship between menarche and season. 
Menarchal age is influenced by diverse factors such as hereditary, geography, 
climate, psychological factors, socioeconomic status, body weight and height, 
nutritional state, body fat and exercise as well as the presence of chronic 
illness. In Korea, there is evidence of secular change toward earlier menarchal 
age, where the average menarchal age was 14.8 in 1952, 14.4 years in 1979, 13.4 
years in 1986, and 12.5 years in 1988. A cross-sectional study was conducted 
from July 1993 to July 1995 among 4237 female middle and high school students, 
aged 14-20 years, in Ansan, Korea, to obtain data on demographic 
characteristics, menarchal age, month of menarche, and the menarchal age of the 
participant's mother. Findings revealed that average menarchal age is 12.5 years 
for the girls and 15.4 +or- 2.3 years for their mothers. Menarche is most common 
in August and January (summer), January and December (winter) in decreasing 
order. Seasonal pattern of menarche may also be related to the psychological 
factors during school vacation such as relaxation, decrease stress from studies, 
and/or physical rest.

DOI: 10.1016/s1054-139x(99)00069-5
PMID: 10447036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Egypt Public Health Assoc. 1994;69(1-2):1-17.

An audit of caesarean section among Saudi females in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Elhag BI(1), Milaat WA, Taylouni ER.

Author information:
(1)Community medicine department, King AbdulAziz University, Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia.

In this study the case records of 1414 patients who delivered at Alshaty 
hospital within one year were examined and some important variables related to 
caesarean section cases and their outcome were discussed. The caesarean section 
rate was found to be 9.9%. The high number of grand multigravida and 
primigravida among these Saudi mothers have contributed to this high caesarean 
section rate. The high emergencies in these sections (73.6%) have resulted in 
higher incidence of maternal and fetal morbidity namely postoperative pyrexia 
(37%), maternal anemia (20%) and extensive neonatal resuscitation (34%). The 
main indications of caesarean section in this hospital were repeated caesarean 
section (34.3%), failure of progress (19.3%) and fetal distress 12.9%. The 
relation and interaction between the three groups were thoroughly discussed 
based on the mechanisms of these indications. It is concluded that the changing 
trend of indications of caesarean section was mostly related to the change in 
departmental management rather than change in the characteristics of the 
patients.

PIP: There has been an increase in the rate of cesarean section in some parts of 
the world. The rising number of indications for cesarean section, the use of 
fetal monitors, the current medico-legal climate, the importance of avoiding 
damage to the baby, and the increased safety of the cesarean section itself are 
some of the reasons cited for this trend. The authors set out to determine the 
rate of cesarean section in relation to parity and age, the main indications of 
cesarean section, and the mortality and morbidity associated with cesarean 
section to the mothers and their newborns. Alshaty hospital is a general 
hospital in Jeddah which has approximately 1500 deliveries per year. The case 
records were examined of 1414 patients who delivered at the hospital over the 
course of one year to ultimately find a cesarean section rate of 9.9%. A large 
number of grand multigravida and primigravida Saudi mothers contributed to this 
high rate. The high incidence of emergency cesarean sections (73.6%) resulted in 
a higher incidence of maternal and fetal morbidity such as postoperative pyrexia 
(37%), maternal anemia (20%), and extensive neonatal resuscitation (34%). 
Repeated cesarean section, failure of progress, and fetal distress were the main 
indications of cesarean section in the hospital. The authors conclude on the 
basis of this study that the changing trend of indications of cesarean section 
was related mainly to the change in departmental management rather than to any 
change in patients' characteristics.

PMID: 7775890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 1998;91(5 Pt 1-2):424-7.

[Intestinal parasitic diseases in an urban environment in Sahel. A study in a 
district of Niamey, Niger].

[Article in French]

Julvez J(1), Bad√© MA, Lamotte M, Campagne G, Garba A, Gragnic G, Bui A, Kehren 
S, Cluzel F, Chippaux JP.

Author information:
(1)Mission de coop√©ration/Minist√®re de la sant√© publique (DEP)/Facult√© des 
sciences de la sant√©, (D√©partement de sant√© publique), Niamey, Niger.

Health and environment in Niamey, a capital in Sahel, are particularly linked 
owing to population growth, promiscuity and large pollution induced by human and 
animal excreta. One district, located in the centre of the town, was surveyed 
for drinking water quality (ammoniac and bacterial count) and use, as well as 
for the prevalence of parasites through both a random sample (fixed tools with 
methiolate-iodine-formaldehyde) and a systematic one (scotch-test). Water 
consumption was 16.5 litres/day/man from fresh water supplies (87%) and private 
wells (13%). Ammoniac measures were low in the wells but high in running water 
(pool and river). It was the same for faecal coliform bacteria. These results 
give evidence of biotope faecal pollution. The random sample (322 persons, 
male/female sex ratio 0,85, average age 20,6 years) showed a 42.1% parasitic 
prevalence. Amoeba was the most frequent parasite (53.6%); and Giardia (14.9%) 
was the most frequent pathogenic parasite. In the second sample (161 children 
under 10 years), 24.2% were carriers of oxyuris. This large intestinal 
parasitism, without any change in connection with previous data in Niger, points 
to an important fecal contamination of the people more by the way of "dirty 
hands" than consumption of drinking water. The parasites observed have a short 
biological cycle, not necessitating long-term maturation in the environment. 
Those whose ova or larvae must complete their cycle outside have no possibility 
of surviving in Sahel, thanks to the beneficial effect of sunlight (heat and 
ultraviolet light). The inhabitants of this district seem to have adapted to 
intestinal parasitism. But the occurrence of malnutrition linked to a new 
drought could lead rapidly to a very serious adverse result.

PMID: 10078379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1989 Feb;55(2):495-9. doi: 
10.1128/aem.55.2.495-499.1989.

In situ survival of Vibrio cholerae and Escherichia coli in a tropical rain 
forest watershed.

P√©rez-Rosas N(1), Hazen TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences, University of Puerto 
Rico, R√≠o Piedras.

For 12 months, Vibrio cholerae and fecal coliform densities were monitored along 
with nine other water quality parameters at 12 sites in a rain forest watershed 
in Puerto Rico. Densities of V. cholerae and fecal coliforms were not 
significantly correlated, even though the highest densities of both bacteria 
were found at a sewage outfall. High densities of V. cholerae were also found at 
pristine sites at the highest point in the watershed. The density of Escherichia 
coli and V. cholerae in membrane diffusion chambers did not change significantly 
during the course of two such studies. Physiological activity, as measured by 
electron transport system activity and relative nucleic acid composition, 
indicated that both E. coli and V. cholerae remained active. This study suggests 
that V. cholerae is indigenous to tropical fresh waters and that assays other 
than those that detect fecal coliforms or E. coli must be used for assessing 
public health risk in tropical waters.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.55.2.495-499.1989
PMCID: PMC184138
PMID: 2655536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Z Hautkr. 1988;63 Suppl 4:108-10.

[Training and conditioning in atopic patients following high altitude climate 
therapy].

[Article in German]

Schuh A(1), Kneist W, Schnizer W, Schobel G, Streicher U, Fischer A.

Author information:
(1)Institut f√ºr Medizinische Balneologie und Klimatologie der Universit√§t 
M√ºnchen.

The subjective and objective values have changed after a four weeks treatment in 
high mountain areas under cool climatic conditions. "Terrainkuren" (mountain 
walking under guidance of a therapist) under cool climatic- and body temperature 
conditions show besides training results (in sport medicine) also favourable 
thermoregulatory adaptations. Improvements of the endurance training can be 
objectivated by means of the reduced heart frequency and the decrease in lactit 
acid under standardized physical exercises. The simultaneous changes of 
thermoregulation can be looked upon as part of the reaction of the whole body 
(also called inurement). Both, the improvement of the training condition and the 
thermoregulatory change seem to support each other. Thus patients can train more 
effectively under the same standardized physical training, but cooler 
conditions. The decrease of comfort temperature of patients is due to the 
thermoregulatory adaptation. There is a considerable decrease in the sensibility 
to cold. The training in high mountain areas causes an improvement in the well 
being and behaviour of the atopic patients which can still be manifested three 
months after the therapy.

PMID: 3252624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Trop Anim Health Prod. 1992 Nov;24(4):231-41. doi: 10.1007/BF02356752.

Genetic and environmental variation in reproductive and lactational performance 
of Jersey cattle in the coastal lowland semi-humid tropics.

Njubi D(1), Rege JE, Thorpe W, Collins-Lusweti E, Nyambaka R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Production, University of Nairobi, Kenya.

Reproductive and lactational performances, including length of productive life, 
were evaluated from records for 1960 to 1988 for a Jersey herd in coastal 
lowland semi-humid Kenya. The herd grazed natural pastures and until the mid 
1970s received supplementary feeding. Mean performance included 31 months age at 
first calving, lactation milk yield (MY) of 1,788 kg in 3.3 lactations and a 
calving interval (CI) of 408 days. Mean milk yields declined from over 2,200 kg 
in the 1960s to about 1,500 kg in the 1980s with concomitant changes in calving 
interval, length of productive life and infertility. While annual genetic 
components of change in MY and CI were not significantly different from zero, 
the environmental components were large and significant (P < 0.01) showing that 
the declines in performance probably resulted from decreased feed availability 
and less efficient disease control. Estimates of genetic parameters were 
consistent with those in the literature. With good management purebred Jersey 
cows in coastal lowland semi-humid Kenya were productive, but animal and herd 
productivity were highly dependent on management level which had a major effect 
on both milk yield and reproductive wastage.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02356752
PMID: 1305346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Nurs Adm Q. 1994 Summer;18(4):65-71. doi: 10.1097/00006216-199401840-00009.

Transformational partnership for delivery of R.N. baccalaureate education: a 
service/education leadership model.

Coluccio M, Kindely Kelley L.

A transformational partnership model between a consortium of rural community 
hospitals and a private Christian university reflects a shared vision for R.N. 
baccalaureate degree completion. The model includes a community-wide system to 
promote and sustain accessible, high-quality education for the place-bound R.N. 
who desires to achieve a B.S.N. Stakeholders, experiencing the current climate 
of change in health care, benefit from this innovative service/education 
leadership model. The collaboration built on a commitment to common goals and 
shared resources seeks to prepare individuals who apply critical thinking to 
practice settings along with the continuum of care.

DOI: 10.1097/00006216-199401840-00009
PMID: 8065639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Med Ethics. 2000 Oct;26(5):330-3. doi: 10.1136/jme.26.5.330.

Should local research ethics committees monitor research they have approved?

Pickworth E(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Manchester.

The function of local research ethics committees is to consider the ethics of 
research proposals using human participants. After approval has been given, 
there is no comprehensive system in place to monitor research and ensure that 
recommendations are carried out. Some suggest that research ethics committees 
are ideally placed to fulfil this function by carrying out random monitoring of 
research they have reviewed. The health service guideline creating local 
research ethics committees is under review. This paper suggests that increasing 
the monitoring role of ethics committees in the present climate would be 
inappropriate. This is due to the large workload of the committees, their 
voluntary nature and the change a monitoring role might cause to the 
relationship between researcher and ethics committee, which might herald an 
increasing recourse to judicial review. A radical overhaul of the system would 
be necessary in order for ethics committees adequately to fulfil a monitoring 
function.

DOI: 10.1136/jme.26.5.330
PMCID: PMC1733278
PMID: 11055034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Contraception. 1996 Apr;53(4):221-9. doi: 10.1016/0010-7824(96)00041-8.

Latex rubber condoms: predicting and extending shelf life.

Free MJ(1), Srisamang V, Vail J, Mercer D, Kotz R, Marlowe DE.

Author information:
(1)Program for Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH), Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Condoms from five manufacturers were subjected to controlled exposures of heat, 
humidity, and air and to different natural environments in five countries. Under 
aerobic conditions (condoms in permeable packages or unpackaged), stress 
properties declined. The relationship between rate of decline as a function of 
temperature was quadratic. Under oxygen-restricted conditions (foil-wrapped 
packages) at average storage temperatures of 30 degrees C and lower, strain 
properties declined with little or no significant change in stress properties. 
The effect is to cause condoms to become stiffer; high-breakage rates in use 
have been correlated with product stiffening. A new rationale for 
accelerated-aging tests to predict condom shelf stability is suggested, 
including a test to control the trend of condoms to stiffen. Silicone lubricant, 
impermeable packaging, and inclusion of antioxidants in the condom formulation 
can prevent or minimize aerobic breakdown of latex condoms. Specifying 
low-modulus condoms can prevent excessive stiffening.

DOI: 10.1016/0010-7824(96)00041-8
PMID: 8706440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. UN Chron. 1999;36(1):19.

Malaria, in second place, sees fewer victims, but greater difficulty of control. 
With climate, including global warming, as complications.

[No authors listed]

PIP: This is an article on malarial risks and prevention. Malaria is the 
deadliest tropical parasitic disease and one of the leading causes of death. The 
risk for this disease has been linked with changes in land use related to road 
building, mining, logging, and agricultural and irrigation projects. Global 
climatic change, disintegration of health services, armed conflicts, and mass 
movements of refugees also contribute to the increasing risk for malaria. 
Disease prevention includes a variety of measures that may protect against 
infection. They may be directed against the mosquito vector or against the 
development of disease in infected individuals. The WHO stresses the curability 
of malaria in spite of the occurrence of drug resistance. If the antimalarial 
drugs are used properly and targeted to those at risk, malarial disease and 
death can be reduced. Vaccines are also in development; an effective one could 
be available within the next 7-15 years.

PMID: 12295239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Ethics Behav. 1995;5(2):147-59. doi: 10.1207/s15327019eb0502_3.

The emergence of interest in the ethics of psychological research with humans.

McGaha AC, Korn JH.

We describe the growth of interest in the ethics of research with human 
participants based on articles abstracted in Psychological Abstracts and 
PsycLIT. Interest was low and variable until 1974, after which there was a 
marked increase in the number of articles published. We explain this emergence 
of ethical interest in terms of the social climate of concern for human rights 
in the 1960s and 1970s, the 1973 revision of the American Psychological 
Association's ethical principles, and the development of federal regulation of 
research with human participants.

DOI: 10.1207/s15327019eb0502_3
PMID: 11654198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. NeuroRehabilitation. 1994;4(2):76-83. doi: 10.3233/NRE-1994-4204.

Commentary on model systems of care in neurotrauma: clinical perspectives and 
future directions.

Hall KM(1), Englander J(1), Wilmot CB(1).

Author information:
(1)Santa Clara Valley Medical Center, San Jose, California.

The first section of this article discusses the principal clinical components of 
a model system of care for traumatic brain injury (TBI) or spinal cord injury 
(SCI). The next section, "The Future of Model Systems", addresses the advantages 
of such a system, as related to the changing health care climate and predicted 
future directions of health care in the United States. The need for innovative 
approaches to rehabilitation is upon us. In addressing this need, the last 
section, "Recommendations for Change", outlines cost-effective measures for 
providing rehabilitation services to our clientele.

DOI: 10.3233/NRE-1994-4204
PMID: 24525318


328. Gewina. 1994;17(4):219-34.

[Development of the medical care for schoolchildren in the Netherlands 
1796-1904].

[Article in Dutch]

de Knecht-van Eekelen A(1).

Author information:
(1)Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Vakgroep Metamedica/Sectie Medische 
Geschiedenis.

The foundations of the school medical service can be found at the end of the 
eighteenth century. In conformity with the ideas of the Enlightenment the middle 
class wanted their thoughts on virtue, education, health and social welfare put 
into practice. During the nineteenth century several laws on primary education 
were enacted that have been of importance to the medical and hygienical care of 
the schoolchild and its environment. In 1806 an Act on primary education was 
accepted that was operative until 1857. The most important change, however, was 
imposed by the Act of 1900 that introduced compulsory primary education. 
Improvement of the environment in which children were educated, was the main aim 
of nineteenth century physicians. They devoted themselves to the improvement of 
the school climate, light, air, ventilation, heat and school-desks and for the 
schoolchild more bodily exercise and gymnastics in combination with a reduction 
of lessons and homework. They argued for lessons in hygiene for pupils as well 
as for teachers, but got few results on these subjects. In the twentieth century 
the school physician made his entry into the school. From 1904 on physicians 
were appointed in an increasing number of municipalities. Their work became part 
of the municipal health services that were founded during these years.

PMID: 11625057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. West J Nurs Res. 2000 Dec;22(8):936-44. doi: 10.1177/01939450022044890.

The evolution of nursing education in a postindependence context--Ghana from 
1957 to 1970.

Opare M(1), Mill JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nursing, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.

Development of nursing education in Ghana between 1957 and 1970 is characterized 
by dynamic change and growth. Published manuscripts, personal interviews, and 
letters were used to analyze evolution of nursing education during this period. 
Following independence in 1957, developments in nursing education continued to 
be strongly influenced by external organizations and their designated experts. 
Policies, such as the local training of nurses and Africanization, provided 
impetus for nurses to further their education to assume senior positions in 
nursing education and administration. Emphasis on training nurses to work in a 
hospital-based curative health system, which had been the legacy of colonialism, 
gradually shifted to a broad-based education that prepared nurses to work in a 
variety of settings. Changes in nursing education occurred within an economic 
climate that presented ongoing impediments, yet the vision of the first 
generation of Ghanaian nurse leaders facilitated the tremendous progress seen 
during this period.

DOI: 10.1177/01939450022044890
PMID: 11109410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Isotopes Environ Health Stud. 2000;36(2):133-49. doi: 10.1080/10256010008032939.

Isotope studies of hydrogen and oxygen in ground ice-experiences with the 
equilibration technique.

Meyer H(1), Sch√∂nicke L, Wand U, Hubberten HW, Friedrichsen H.

Author information:
(1)Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, Research Unit 
Potsdam, Germany. hmeyer@ awi-potsdam.de

Equilibration technique suitable for a large amount of samples is described for 
hydrogen and oxygen isotope analyses of ground ice, especially ice wedges, 
including the sampling strategy and the analytical procedure as well as the 
calibration of the Finnigan MAT Delta-S mass spectrometer in June, 1999. Since 
for future analyses of ice wedges, a higher sampling resolution with limited 
sample volume is required, the limit of the equilibration technique for small 
water sample sizes of between 0.05 and 5 ml was checked. For water samples 
smaller than 1 ml, corresponding to a molar ratio [H2O]/[H2] of smaller than 
0.994, a balance correction has to be applied. The experimental errors due to 
partial evaporation during evacuation, the balance calculation of the isotope 
equilibration process, the linearity as well as memory effects of the mass 
spectrometer for samples with large differences in delta18O and deltaD are 
tackled in this paper. In the polar regions of Northern Siberia without Late 
Pleistocene and Holocene glaciation, ground ice is used as an archive for 
paleoclimate studies. First results of stable isotope measurements on ice wedges 
clearly show a shift towards heavier isotopes and thus warmer winter 
temperatures as well as a change in the source of the precipitation between Late 
Pleistocene and Holocene. These results indicate the high potential of ground 
ice for paleoclimate studies.

DOI: 10.1080/10256010008032939
PMID: 11077928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Feb;108(2):109-17. doi: 10.1289/ehp.00108109.

Estimating the mortality impacts of particulate matter: what can be learned from 
between-study variability?

Levy JI(1), Hammitt JK, Spengler JD.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Environmental Health and Biostatistics, Harvard School of 
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. jilevy@hsph.harvard.edu

Epidemiologic studies of the link between particulate matter (PM) concentrations 
and mortality rates have yielded a range of estimates, leading to disagreement 
about the magnitude of the relationship and the strength of the causal 
connection. Previous meta-analyses of this literature have provided pooled 
effect estimates, but have not addressed between-study variability that may be 
associated with analytical models, pollution patterns, and exposed populations. 
To determine whether study-specific factors can explain some of the variability 
in the time-series studies on mortality from particulate matter [less than/equal 
to] 10 microm in aerodynamic diameter (PM(10)), we applied an empirical Bayes 
meta-analysis. We estimate that mortality rates increase on average by 0.7% per 
10 microg/m(3) increase in PM(10) concentrations, with greater effects at sites 
with higher ratios of particulate matter [less than/equal to] 2.5 microm in 
aerodynamic diameter (PM(2.5))/PM(10). This finding did not change with the 
inclusion of a number of potential confounders and effect modifiers, although 
there is some evidence that PM effects are influenced by climate, housing 
characteristics, demographics, and the presence of sulfur dioxide and ozone. 
Although further analysis would be needed to determine which factors causally 
influence the relationship between PM(10) and mortality, these findings can help 
guide future epidemiologic investigations and policy decisions.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.00108109
PMCID: PMC1637882
PMID: 10656850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Drug Alcohol Rev. 1991;10(4):401-15. doi: 10.1080/09595239100185451.

Least bad solutions to the 'drugs problem'.

Mugford S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sociology, Faculty of Arts, Australian National University, PO 
Box 4, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, 2601, Australia.

This paper examines the current difficulties being faced in Australia by 
policy-makers attempting to regulate the non-medical use of illegal drugs, and 
it is suggested that the difficulties centre upon two aspects. First, existing 
prohibitions are unsuccessful, with use levels rising and, in some arenas (e.g. 
cocaine use in the USA), quite out of control. On the other hand, a move towards 
decriminalization or legalization is difficult because past propaganda has been 
so vehement that a change now apparently risks sending the wrong messages to 
young people. This dilemma means that there is no solution, including inertia, 
which is risk-free, nor is there one free of difficulties. It is thus relevant 
to think in terms of 'least bad' rather than 'best' when formulating a system to 
face these problems. The exploration of what this least bad solution might be 
begins with the examination of the prominent myths (such as 'the drug-free 
society', 'the evil pusher', 'the user as victim' and 'the young person as 
cultural dope') that hinder our reasoning. Secondly, by suggesting that, in a 
climate of increasing crime related to drugs, inability of prohibitions to 
control that use and escalating health risks attendant on use (including the 
AIDS problem), the central policy thrust must be harm reduction and damage 
minimization rather than illusory goals such as widespread abstinence. The paper 
concludes with a discussion of some relevant evidence on alternative options.

DOI: 10.1080/09595239100185451
PMID: 16818303


333. Dev Dialogue. 1980;1:85-101.

Socio-political constraints on primary health care: a case study from Java.

Williams G, Satoto.

PIP: The Alma-Ata 1978 conference emphasized the importance of the concept of 
primary health care in the health system and overall socioeconomic development 
of the community. However, theories of development generally do not allow for 
the complexity of human conditions, and the relevance of contact with the 
village people. This paper presents the experience of a PHC (primary health 
care) project on the northern coast of central Java. The case illustrates some 
of the institutional and sociopolitical constraints which the Indonesian 
government may face in implementing a PHC program in the next few years, such as 
village politics; the reluctance of men to allow women to participate in the 
decision-making process of the program, and; the reluctance of land-owning 
farmers to allow landless villagers in the decision-making process. The 
following conditions would create a most favorable sociopolitical climate for 
starting a PHC program in Indonesia: 1) at the village level, non-pamong desa 
(village elders), women and landless villagers are encouraged to participate in 
decision-making processes which affect their interests and to take on positions 
of responsibility in village affairs; 2) there is a process of frank, 2-way 
communication marked by mutual respect between government agencies at regency 
and subdistrict levels village-level organization, and 3) supra-village 
authorities allow village institution to develop at their own pace, intervening 
only when interests of poor and underprivileged groups are endangered.

PMID: 12261889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. IPPF News. 1979 Nov-Dec;4(6):5.

Moves to reform contraceptive law in Francophone Africa.

[No authors listed]

PIP: A workshop organized by International Planned Parenthood Federation's 
(IPPF) Africa Regional Office was attended by Ministry Justice and Ministry of 
Women's Affairs representatives of 10 Francophone African countries. The 
participants focused on tribal, customary and religious laws with particular 
attention to issues such as polygamy, the age of marriage, and the dowry system. 
Although the participants did not feel it was time for any attempt to change 
those sections of the 1920 Family Law relating to abortion, they did propose 
that Francophone governments consider the repeal of provisions banning the 
manufacture, distribution, and advertising of contraceptives. This change they 
believed would enable family planning programs to be established on a firm legal 
basis. The Law Panel, at its 2-day meeting, explored the subjects of voluntary 
sterilization, contraceptive services to teen-agers, the use of auxiliary health 
workers for family planning, and the need for a favorable legal climate as a 
prerequisite for the success of women's development programs. The Panel 
recommended that support be given to projects aimed at making women aware of 
their existing rights and adoption of legislation which improves their status. 1 
of the workshop concerns was the use of paramedicals for community health care.

PMID: 12261463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Health Libr Rev. 1995 Dec;12(4):279-93. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2532.1995.1240279.x.

Implications of the UNNDERPIN study at St George's Hospital, Morpeth, 
Northumberland.

Banwell L(1), Chalk B, Day J, Walton G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Information and Library Management, University of Northumbria 
at Newcastle, UK.

UNNDERPIN (University of Northumbria at Newcastle DEvelopment of and Research 
into the Provision of Information to Nurses and nurse educators) was an 8-month 
research project at St George's Hospital, Morpeth, Northumberland. The general 
aim of the project has been to undertake an examination of library and 
information services in a climate of change where user information needs are 
changing and demanding changed services to be provided to meet those needs in 
order to support patient care and clinical developments. The paper gives an 
overview of the project describing its background and presenting a summary of 
the research findings, conclusions and wider implications of the work.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2532.1995.1240279.x
PMID: 10162533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Aviakosm Ekolog Med. 1992 Jul-Aug;26(4):40-3.

[The effect of moderate altitude on the maintenance of a good health status and 
high physical work capacity in cosmonauts over the course of a long period of 
time].

[Article in Russian]

Zavadovskiƒ≠ AF, Vavakin IuN, Korotaev MM.

The development of the methods to maintain good health and high performance and 
occupational longevity of cosmonauts is an urgent problem. For this end, an 
effect of periodic (1-2 times a year) training in mid-lands on working and 
functional capacities of cosmonauts being members of cosmonauts corps for 
extended periods of time (20 years) was studied; the results of 40 trainings in 
mid-lands at 1,600 to 2,400 m above sea level are summarized. Before, during and 
after training, the physiological and physical parameters of the body (BP after 
Korotkoff, HR, VO2max) during exercise bicycle ergometer tests as well as the 
time of running on treadmill at a rate of 4.5 m/s to failure have been examined. 
The experimental findings indicated that after terminating physical training in 
mid-lands the major group of test subjects exhibited a significant decrease in 
HR as compared to the control value. During acclimatization, the arterial 
pressure (systolic and diastolic) measured when exercising on bicycle ergometer 
at 600 and 1000 kgm/min also reduced. As a result of improving the measured 
parameters after acclimatization to mountain environments the total body 
tolerance increased. A cumulative effect of the regular stay in mid-lands 
appears to change VO2max which did not decrease in man with age and the 
performance value (after i.v. Aulik classification) in the 40-49 age group 
subjects became very high.

PMID: 1296838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Nurs Times. 1996 Nov 6-12;92(45):40-2.

A chance for community nurses to shape the health agenda.

Fatchett A(1).

Author information:
(1)Leeds Metropolitan University.

Low morale among community nurses has been well documented. Such demoralisation 
may be caused by a climate of continuous organisational change and financial 
stringency. The author argues, however, that there are many opportunities for 
community nurses to influence local and national health care agendas. She urges 
nurses to diversify in response to current demands.

PMID: 9000974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Br J Addict. 1989 Feb;84(2):203-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.1989.tb00570.x.

Health authority policies for the prevention of alcohol problems.

Anderson P.

Although national policy has a major influence in preventing alcohol problems, 
much can be done at a local level. In addition national policy can either be 
made or at least influenced from the local level, and local communities are well 
placed to change attitudes and influence key processes, thus creating a climate 
for appropriate national debates and policy developments. This paper addresses 
why a local policy is needed for the prevention of alcohol problems, and then 
considers a number of the components of such a policy, how such a policy might 
be implemented, and how such a policy might be evaluated.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.1989.tb00570.x
PMID: 2720185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Issue Brief Cent Stud Health Syst Change. 2000 Oct;(32):1-4.

Are defined contributions a new direction for employer-sponsored coverage?

Trude S, Ginsburg PB.

Defined contributions for health benefits are being promoted as the new silver 
bullet for employers to combat the rising costs of health care, the managed care 
backlash and the changing climate for employer liability. As interest in this 
concept grows, so does the number of proposed alternatives for implementing it. 
Originally called fixed contributions, defined contributions now also refer to 
cash transfers or vouchers, with reliance on the individual market for health 
insurance. A more recent angle for defined contributions is using the Internet 
as an on-line marketplace for purchasing health insurance. This Issue Brief 
examines defined-contribution strategies and assesses issues relevant to 
employers, employees and public policy makers.

PMID: 11503693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Curr Anthropol. 1999 Apr;40(2):137-70. doi: 10.1086/200002.

Environmental imperatives reconsidered: demographic crises in western North 
America during the medieval climatic anomaly.

Jones TL(1), Brown GM, Raab LM, McVickar JL, Spaulding WG, Kennett DJ, York A, 
Wlaker PL.

Author information:
(1)California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.

Review of late Holocene paleoenvironmental and cultural sequences from four 
regions of western North America show striking correlations between drought and 
changes in subsistence, population, exchange, health, and interpersonal violence 
during the Medieval Climatic Anomaly (A.D. 800-1350). While ultimate causality 
is difficult to identify in the archaeological record, synchrony of the 
environmental and cultural changes and the negative character of many human 
responses--increased interpersonal violence, deterioration of long-distance 
exchange relationships, and regional abandonments--suggest widespread 
demographic crises caused by decreased environmental productivity. The medieval 
droughts occurred at a unique juncture in the demographic history of western 
North America when unusually large populations of both hunter-gathers and 
agriculturalists had evolved highly intensified economies that put them in 
unprecedented ecological jeopardy. Long-term patterns in the archaeological 
record are inconsistent with the predicted outcomes of simple adaptation or 
continuous economic intensification, suggesting that in this instance 
environmental dynamics played a major role in cultural transformations across a 
wide expanse of western North America among groups with diverse subsistence 
strategies. These events suggest that environment should not be overlooked as a 
potential cause of prehistoric culture change.

DOI: 10.1086/200002
PMID: 11623670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Occup Environ Med. 2000 Sep;42(9):882-91. doi: 
10.1097/00043764-200009000-00006.

Relationships between environmental factors and lung function of asthmatic 
subjects in south east Queensland, Australia.

Rutherford S(1), Simpson R, Williams G, Mitchell C, McCall B.

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Griffith University, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia. s.rutherford@mailbox.gu.edu.au

Few panel studies have investigated the relationships between air pollutants and 
air spora and lung function change in asthmatic subjects. This article examines 
the association of outdoor air pollutant concentrations and air spora with the 
decrease in lung function (measured by morning peak expiratory flow) of two 
groups of asthmatic subjects in the subtropical environment of South East 
Queensland, Australia. Lung function responses were stratified by age, allergy 
status, and location, and seasonal effects were examined. Allergy status and age 
were found to be important, with air pollutants such as ozone and particles 
associated with decreases in lung function in allergic individuals older than 15 
years. Fungal spore counts were strongly associated with a decrease in lung 
function in allergic adults, especially in those over 54 years, only in seasons 
when these air spora peak. Analysis for the entire study period indicates that 
the effect of ozone on peak expiratory flow in the allergic group can sometimes 
be confounded by air spora effects, indicating that in a subtropical climate the 
impact of ozone on asthma severity can be accurately estimated only when the 
confounding effects of air spora are included.

DOI: 10.1097/00043764-200009000-00006
PMID: 10998763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Clin Nurs. 1998 Sep;7(5):451-9. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2702.1998.00175.x.

Using the Delphi technique to identify the content and context of nurses' 
continuing professional development needs.

Gibson JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Studies, University of York.

In order to identify and prioritize the development needs of medical and 
surgical nurses, their possible approaches to learning, and the contextual 
factors influencing their professional development, a Delphi survey was carried 
out using a panel of 28 participants. Current development needs included skills 
in essential clinical care, specialist nursing, changing roles, patient care 
management, research and practice development. Although there was ambivalence 
about changing nurses' clinical roles, participants expected roles to diversify 
in the future. The need for responsiveness to change was emphasized, as was the 
need to maintain current areas of expertise. Professional development activity 
could take many forms, but fostering an organizational climate in which 
development was inherent in everyday working practices was felt to be as 
valuable as formal course attendance. Restricting factors included lack of time, 
resources, support and recognition. The survey has enabled professional and 
practice development activities to be prioritized locally, and the method used 
could be readily applied to other settings.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2702.1998.00175.x
PMID: 9855997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Sex Planeam Fam. 1994 Jul-Sep;(3):3.

[Casal Ventoso: the need to discover other ways of living].

[Article in Portuguese]

[No authors listed]

PIP: It is often thought that it is vital for people to discover that there are 
other ways of existing, talking, and living, as articulated during a 
conversation at the social center of Casal Ventoso. Here this hope unites part 
of the staff in a district characterized by poverty and the trafficking in and 
consumption of drugs. In this climate there is a perpetuation of almost 
everything bad. In the facility, sensitive care is practiced even for those who 
just pass through here, and a systematic effort is exerted to make people 
realize that there are other patterns of living. Talking about family planning 
in Casa Ventoso means bringing up a taboo topic for these people in a 
marginalized area. There is plenty of evidence of social problems, which 
underscores the need for reacting and inducing change. During the long 
conversation it was felt that the two basic issues were correlated: the reality 
and the needs of the district and an effort to respond to them as well as the 
example of the center as a way pointing to other solutions and possibilities of 
life. The social center has developed its basic social activities in the area of 
work with children and young people, although physical space is still inadequate 
and there is shortage of funds.

PMID: 12179266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Caring. 1998 Feb;17(2):62-4, 66, 68-70.

Getting a grip on the future: managing the change process.

Koch LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Eldermanage, Inc., Atlanta, GA, USA.

How will providers streamline existing administrative and clinical care systems 
to meet the new regulatory requirements? How will they reorganize to cope with 
outcome-based quality improvement? Success in this rollercoaster climate depends 
on providers' ability to manage the change process.

PMID: 10178040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Nurs Stand. 1993 Jun 2-8;7(37):38-40. doi: 10.7748/ns.7.37.38.s41.

Community nurses: a culture of uncertainty.

Traynor M.

From April to December 1991, nearly 1,000 community-based nurses working in the 
areas covered by four first-wave community Trusts took part in the first year of 
a three-year study on job satisfaction. Their comments revealed that a climate 
of uncertainty, fear and a certain amount of alienation existed, as well as 
pockets of optimism. The next phase of the study will show how nurses see their 
role and future as the change to Trust status begins to take effect.

DOI: 10.7748/ns.7.37.38.s41
PMID: 8338735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Int Migr. 1987 Dec;25(4):399-413. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2435.1987.tb00599.x.

Economic recession and migrant/minority youth in Western Europe and the United 
States.

Limage LJ.

PIP: This paper considers the educational opportunities and employment futures 
of the children of migrants and minorities in Western Europe and the US beyond 
the lowest-paid and lowest-valued jobs currently held by their parents. Given 
that the economic recession has aggravated unemployment in the countries of 
origin of workers migrating to both Northern Europe and the US, it seems likely 
that workers will still want to go abroad. On the other hand, these workers in 
both regions have been concentrated in a highly segmented labor market in which 
they have little opportunity for professional advancement. A thriving black 
market for illegal workers also exists both for the US and for Northern Europe. 
Since this labor market structure shows no signs of fundamental change through 
natural or policy-directed means, it appears unlikely that migrants' children 
can expect any significant enhancement of their professional prospects. An 
alternative educational strategy might involve public commitment to provide 
effective education, training, and subsidized employment for all young people. 
Some type of allowance would be guaranteed to all young people engaging in 
further education and training schemes. Since the state is responsible for free 
elementary and secondary education, there may be a convincing argument that 
public responsibility extends to providing free further education and access to 
employment as well, as part of a forward-looking strategy for overcoming youth 
unemployment. Obviously, the current conservative climate across industrial 
nations is more inclined to blame the sloth of the victim who is unemployed. It 
is a legitimate question, however, as to how far a society can allow itself to 
widen the gap between rich and poor before it is obligated to change things.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-2435.1987.tb00599.x
PMID: 12281535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Ann Hum Biol. 1993 Jan-Feb;20(1):1-11. doi: 10.1080/03014469300002442.

Human biology in international research programmes.

Roberts DF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

This lecture draws to the attention of human biologists the opportunities that 
are available for their participation in international research programmes. 
Relevant past and present research programmes of the International Union of 
Biological Sciences are described, together with the larger programmes of the 
human genome initiative, and the international geosphere biosphere programme on 
global change of the International Council of Scientific Unions; and the smaller 
programmes of the World Health Organization and the Council of the European 
Community. Human biologists have much to contribute to such programmes, but, to 
do so, personal interests need to be tailored to the requirements of each 
specific programme.

DOI: 10.1080/03014469300002442
PMID: 8093657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Adv Nurs. 1980 Jul;5(4):371-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2648.1980.tb00977.x.

Organization development in a psychiatric hospital: creating desirable changes.

Cope D, Cox S.

The organization of the way in which hospitals and hospital staff provide a 
service to patients is obviously of critical importance to their effectiveness, 
yet it is clear that rigidities and inappropriate and ineffective procedures 
frequently intrude. It is commonly held that changing hospitals as organizations 
is difficult to acomplish, and indeed, reported attempts at such change reflect 
this. The project reported here was a successful attempt at changing a number of 
different aspects of the culture of a psychiatric hospital which included 
managerial practices and structure, aspects of patient care, multidisciplinary 
team work, and staff development. The present paper concentrates on some 
specific outcomes at ward level. The general pattern for bringing about change 
involves the collection of (valid) data and then feeding this back to the staff 
involved so that they can take appropriate action. The data discussed here 
concerned ward nursing staff's attitude to the 'climate' of the hospital, their 
job satisfaction and aspects of patient care. This was fed back to nursing, 
managerial and medical staff, and action plans were agreed to overcome the 
difficulties highlighted. Outcomes have included the production of ward and unit 
objectives and changes in treatment programmes and aspects of patient care on 
the wards.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2648.1980.tb00977.x
PMID: 6902730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Med Law. 1999;18(2-3):363-71.

Retaining the abortion law in Slovakia.

Kliment M(1), Cupanik V.

Author information:
(1)Slovak Family Planning Association, Bratislava.

This article tells of the founding of the Slovak Family Planning Association 
(FPA), of the approaches and strategies it has adopted in advocating expansion 
of family planning education and services, of the challenges and opposition it 
has faced, and continues to face, in Slovakia's generally unreceptive political 
climate to its efforts to promote respect for internationally recognized 
standards of reproductive health and choice, and of the dramatic reductions in 
the abortion rate--achieved without resort to legislative changes restricting 
abortion--that have occurred since the Slovak FPA began work.

PMID: 10536402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Med Care. 1989 Jan;27(1):16-24. doi: 10.1097/00005650-198901000-00002.

Practice changes in response to the malpractice litigation climate. Results of a 
Maryland physician survey.

Weisman CS(1), Morlock LL, Teitelbaum MA, Klassen AC, Celentano DD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Policy and Management, School of Hygiene and Public 
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

Data from a 1987 survey of Maryland physicians in three specialties (internal 
medicine, family or general practice, and obstetrics-gynecology) were used to 
study the types of changes physicians have made in their practices during the 
last 2 years as a result of the current malpractice litigation climate. Overall, 
51% reported making some type of practice change. The practice changes that 
physicians reported reflect both risk-reduction (e.g., increased use of tests) 
and risk-avoidance (e.g., cutting back high-risk patients) strategies, although 
risk-reduction actions were reported more frequently. Raising patient fees was 
also reported. Specialty predicts whether or not physicians make each type of 
change; in particular, obstetrician-gynecologists are more likely to report 
practice changes of all types. Prior litigation experience does not, in general, 
predict practice changes. The implications of the types of changes reported for 
access to care and costs of care were considered.

DOI: 10.1097/00005650-198901000-00002
PMID: 2911218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Health Serv Manage Res. 1993 Feb;6(1):12-23. doi: 10.1177/095148489300600102.

RMI (Resource Management Initiative) and quality--getting the climate right.

Carswell L(1), McAlister D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Administration and Legal Studies, University of Ulster, 
Jordanstown.

The literature on the Resource Management Initiative (RMI) identifies an 
improvement in the quality of patient care as one of its principal aims. 
Successful implementation of RMI requires a change in behaviour. The mechanism 
or process by which this is to be achieved is not clear. This paper explores the 
possible nature of this relationship. We suggest that an understanding of the 
mechanisms through which an acute hospital can influence quality is best viewed 
from the perspective of organisational climate. The paper suggests a normative 
model for exploring climate and quality linkages through the operation of six 
key organisational levers. The applicability of the model is discussed 
throughout with reference to a RM acute hospital.

DOI: 10.1177/095148489300600102
PMID: 10124347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J R Soc Med. 1992 May;85(5):279-81.

Bringing about change: the introduction of secure units.

Stocking B(1).

Author information:
(1)King's Fund Centre for Health Services Development, London.

The introduction of regional secure units into the NHS was studied as one 
example of the diffusion of patient care innovations. As well as the general 
history of secure units events in four Regions were studied in detail for the 
period from 1974 up to mid-1983. It is concluded that secure units became 
gradually more acceptable over time as (i) the need for such units was 
recognized, (ii) the climate of opinion changed in psychiatric hospitals from 
seeing secure units as a retrograde step, following the acceptance of more open 
door policies, to seeing secure units as a prestige development which might 
safeguard the future of a particular hospital, (iii) government loosened the 
definitions of what secure units should be and how they should operate so that 
there was more room for different regions to assess their own needs. Regions 
which were able to move relatively fast on secure unit development were those 
where there was already a 'product champion' present to promote the ideas, 
usually a forensic psychiatrist, and where there was also managerial support and 
designated responsibility for secure unit development at local and regional 
level. It is concluded that while public reaction was a hindrance it did not 
slow down secure unit development as much as might have been expected.

PMCID: PMC1294606
PMID: 1433091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Res Q Exerc Sport. 1997 Mar;68(1):62-73. doi: 10.1080/02701367.1997.10608867.

Factors affecting the creation of a new ecology in a boys-only physical 
education class at a military school.

Hastie PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Human Performance, Auburn University, USA. 
hastipe@mail.auburn.edu

This study describes the changes which occurred in the instructional ecology of 
a boys' physical education class with a change of teacher. Moreover, it examines 
the critical incidences which promoted and inhibited that teacher's attempts to 
change the accountability system of the class from one of attendance and minimal 
participation to one of performance quality. Twenty-two eighth and ninth grade 
boys participated in a 6-week program of physical activity with the researcher 
as the new teacher. Through an action research methodology, using the teacher's 
reflective accounts of lessons together with formal and informal interviews with 
the students, it was determined that three factors were critical in the change 
process: the students' previous history with the subject, the nature of the set 
tasks, and the emotional climate of the class.

DOI: 10.1080/02701367.1997.10608867
PMID: 9094764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Behav Med. 1992 Apr;15(2):113-25. doi: 10.1007/BF00848320.

Symptoms of illness in late adulthood are related to childhood social 
deprivation and misfortune in men but not in women.

Patterson TL(1), Smith LW, Smith TL, Yager J, Grant I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Diego, 
California 92161.

Experiencing adverse life events during childhood may increase vulnerability to 
physical illnesses and psychological disorders during adulthood. We developed an 
Early Life Events Questionnaire (ELEQ) with 12 scales and administered it to 92 
relatively healthy elderly individuals (29 men and 63 women). A 
canonical-correlation analysis of the 12 ELEQ scales and physical and 
psychological symptoms revealed a significant canonical correlation. The results 
indicate that those who grew up in a family with a harsh climate and whose 
affiliation needs were not met tended to have more psychological and physical 
symptoms in old age. Regression analysis revealed that, in men, early life 
events accounted for 42% of the variance in physical symptoms and 39% in 
psychological symptoms. No significant relationship, however, was found between 
ELEQ scales and health outcomes in women. These results suggest that women may 
be less vulnerable than men to the adverse health consequences of childhood 
deprivation and other misfortunes.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00848320
PMID: 1583676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Afr Dev. 1979;4(4):56-63.

Education and fertility: policy implications for developing countries.

Akinkoye O.

PIP: Efforts to reduce the high rates of population growth in Africa are largely 
hampered by a social and political climate which does not recognize high birth 
rates as a problem. Only 2 countries (Kenya and Ghana) are actively antinatalist 
officially, the rest being actively pronatalist or taking no firm stand. The 
author argues that support for family planning will grow only when governments 
support mass education programs. A framework showing the linkages between 
fertility and formal education is developed. On the demographic level, pursuit 
of higher levels of education delays entry into marriage, directly and through 
pursuit of occupations which do not encourage early marriage. Lowered infant 
mortality through improved utilization of modern health care by the educated 
also leads to reduced fertility. On the sociocultural level, migration to urban 
centers among the educated leads to new cultural norms and constraints on large 
families from the pursuit of modern careers. The author asserts that the inverse 
relation between education and fertility is well known, and that national 
support for mass education is needed to speed economic development, change the 
position of women and alter peoples' values.

PMID: 12338589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Med Care. 1990 Nov;28(11):1013-24. doi: 10.1097/00005650-199011000-00004.

Managing physician incentives in managed care. The role of for-profit ownership.

Pauly MV(1), Hillman AL, Kerstein J.

Author information:
(1)Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

The recent rapid growth of HMOs has resulted in a proliferation of contractual 
arrangements that offer financial incentives to induce primary care doctors to 
change the way they practice medicine. The impact of these incentives varies 
with the different incentives and with the environments in which the incentives 
are implemented. Although financial incentives exist in some form in the great 
majority of HMOs, there has been no detailed and valid information available on 
the way these physician incentives are managed or on the characteristics of the 
standard operating "climate" in which the incentives exist. This study was 
designed to measure a firm (organizational) characteristic hypothesized to be 
related to the firm's effort, ability, or desire to make financial incentives 
work strongly. The characteristic considered is whether the firm is a for-profit 
or a not-for-profit organization. The goal of this study was to provide a direct 
test of the relationship between HMO ownership type and the effectiveness of 
primary care physician incentives. Results of the study indicate that for-profit 
ownership does enhance the power (or the need) of management to offer effective 
rewards for parsimonious use of health care resources.

DOI: 10.1097/00005650-199011000-00004
PMID: 2250489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Health Policy. 1993 Jan;23(1-2):83-95. doi: 10.1016/0168-8510(93)90008-d.

The development of minimally invasive therapy in the United Kingdom.

Ong BN(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Health Planning and Management, Keele University, UK.

The diffusion of minimally invasive therapy (MIT) must be understood against the 
background of sweeping changes in the organisation and funding of the National 
Health Service (NHS) in the UK. The separation of purchasers from providers of 
health care makes national policy, in theory, less important, as local 
developments are supposed to drive the process of needs assessment and resource 
allocation. Within this climate new technologies increasingly have to prove 
their cost-effectiveness. Yet the country case study illustrates that such 
studies lack established methodologies and wide application. One of the key 
barriers to diffusion lies within the profession itself, where resistance to 
paradigmatic change is the strongest force against innovation. The partnership 
between innovative clinicians and forward-looking managers is important if 
diffusion of new procedures is to be secured. The discussion of the 10 examples 
will highlight some of these important issues.

DOI: 10.1016/0168-8510(93)90008-d
PMID: 10171347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Oecologia. 1997 Apr;110(3):423-431. doi: 10.1007/s004420050177.

Reconstruction of the carbon balance for microsites in a boreal oligotrophic 
pine fen, Finland.

Alm J(1), Talanov A(2), Saarnio S(1), Silvola J(1), Ikkonen E(2), Aaltonen H(1), 
Nyk√§nen H(3), Martikainen PJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Joensuu, P.O. Box 111, FIN-80101 
Joensuu, Finland, , , , , , FI.
(2)Institute of Biology, Karelian Research Centre of Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Puskinskaja St. 11, SU-185610 Petrozavodsk, Russia, , , , , , RU.
(3)Laboratory of Environmental Microbiology, National Public Health Institute, 
P.O. Box 95, FIN-70701 Kuopio, Finland, , , , , , FI.

‚ÄÇCarbon dioxide (CO2) exchange was studied at flark (minerotrophic hollow), lawn 
and hummock microsites in an oligotrophic boreal pine fen. Statistical response 
functions were constructed for the microsites in order to reconstruct the annual 
CO2 exchange balance from climate data. Carbon accumulation was estimated from 
the annual net CO2 exchange, methane (CH4) emissions and leaching of carbon. Due 
to high water tables in the year 1993, the average carbon accumulation at the 
flark, Eriophorum lawn, Carex lawn and hummock microsites was high, 2.91, 6.08, 
2.83 and 2.66 mol C m-2, respectively, and for the whole peatland it was 5.66 
mol m-2 year-1. During the maximum primary production period in midsummer, 
hummocks with low water tables emitted less methane than predicted from the 
average net ecosystem exchange (NEE), while the Carex lawns emitted slightly 
more. CH4 release during that period corresponded to 16% of the contemporary 
NEE. Annual C accumulation rate did not correlate with annual CH4 release in the 
microsites studied, but the total community CO2 release seemed to be related to 
CH4 emissions in the wet microsites, again excluding the hummocks. The 
dependence of CO2 exchange dynamics on weather events suggests that daily 
balances in C accumulation are labile and can change from net carbon uptake to 
net release, primarily in high hummocks on fens under warmer, drier climatic 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/s004420050177
PMID: 28307232


359. Health Soc Work. 1999 Feb;24(1):35-41. doi: 10.1093/hsw/24.1.35.

Promises in the plague: passage of the Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources 
Emergency Act as a case study for legislative action.

Poindexter CC(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Social Work, Boston University, 264 Bay State Road, Boston, MA 
02215, USA.

In a conservative political climate, it is very important that social workers 
and others who are concerned with social welfare understand how to affect social 
change through legislative advocacy. This article presents a case study in 
successful intervention using the passage by the Congress of the Ryan White 
Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency (CARE) Act of 1990. The major influences 
in the passage of this landmark bill were building a diverse coalition that 
provided a very broad base of advocacy; securing bipartisan support; using 
recognizable personalities to call attention to the problem; and defining the 
issue as one that affected people from all socioeconomic and ethnic groups.

DOI: 10.1093/hsw/24.1.35
PMID: 14533418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Arh Hig Rada Toksikol. 1992 Dec;43(4):349-57.

Psychosocial work environment in relation to changes in selected biochemical 
parameters in district nurses.

Donceviƒá S(1), Theorell T, Kallner A.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Psyhosocial Factors and Health, Stockholm, Sweden.

Sixty-four female district nurses between the ages of 25 and 60 in the greater 
Stockholm area were subjects in a longitudinal study of psychosocial work 
environment and biochemical serum parameters. Each participant filled out 
questionnaires and had blood drawn on four different occasions at three-month 
intervals during one year. The rating on the fourth occasion showed psychosocial 
work environment to have deteriorated--social climate and authority over 
decisions were significantly inferior to those on previous occasions. These 
changes were accompanied by small but significant elevations of serum 
cholesterol, calcium and triglycerides. Another pattern was also observed which 
was probably due to increased health habit awareness--a progressive decrease in 
glycated haemoglobin and gamma glutamyl transferase. No significant interactions 
were observed with age or smoking habits--old and young subjects did not differ 
in their change patterns over time, nor did smokers in respect to non-smokers.

PMID: 1297311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Bull Pan Am Health Organ. 1985;19(1):29-39.

The seasonality of infant deaths due to diarrheal and respiratory diseases in 
southern Brazil, 1974-1978.

Victora CG, Vaughan JP, Barros FC.

PIP: Death certificate information was used to examine seasonal variations in 
infant deaths attributable to diarrheal and respiratory diseases during a 5-year 
period (1974-78) in the Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sol. The state has a 
subtropical climate with 4 marked seasons in which the temperature ranges from 
14 degrees Centigrade to 24 degrees Centigrade. Rainfall is fairly evenly 
distributed througout the year but varies from year to year. Death registration 
is relatively high in the area, and deaths are coded according to the 8th 
revision of the International Classification of Diseases. In this study all 
diseases classified as 000-009 were considered to be diarrheal deaths, and all 
those classified as 460-519 were considered to be respiratory deaths. A total of 
40,219 infants deaths were recorded during the 5-year period. Monthly mortality 
rates were computed. The denominator for all monthly rates was the number of 
infants alive at the midpoint of the 5-year period as estimated from census 
materials. The same denominator could be used since there was little change in 
the birth rate during the 5-year period and little seasonal variation in birth 
rates. 16.2% of the infant deaths occurring during 1974-78 were attributable to 
diarrheal diseases, and 19.8% were attributable to respiratory diseases. About 
1/2 of all the respiratory and diarrheal deaths occurred during the 1st 4 months 
of life. For example, the diarrheal death rate at months 0-3 was 120/100,000 
infants, and by the 12th month the rate declined to 7.5/100,000 infants. 30.5% 
of the deaths attributed to respiratory diseases occurred during the 1st month 
of life, and then the rate declined sharply. There were marked and statistically 
significant seasonal variations in deaths due to both causes. The incidence of 
diarrheal deaths was almost 4 times higher during the summer months 
(January-February) than during the winter months (July-October). This 
correlation was significant at the 0.0008 level. The pattern was reversed for 
respiratory deaths. The respiratory death rate was twice as high during the 
winter months June-July as during the summer months of December-Februray. This 
correlation was significant at the 0.0002 level. There was no significant 
relationship between rainfall and deaths due to respiratory and diarrheal 
diseases. Multiple linear regression analysis revealed that temperature 
explained 68.9% of the variation in diarrheal deaths and 85.9% of the variation 
in respiratory deaths. Infants born in October through December (the months just 
preceding the summer months) had a higher risk of diarrheal death than infants 
born during other months. In contrast, infants born in March through July had a 
higher risk of death from respiratory disease than infants born during other 
months. The overall rate of infant deaths due to respiratory disease was 
860.4/100,000 infants. The overall rate of infant deaths due to diaarheal 
diseases was 70.4/100,000 infants. Some caution should be used in interpreting 
the results of the study. The overall rate for diarrheal deaths appears to be 
relatively low for the region and may indicate an underreporting of deaths. 
Furthermore, the cause of death noted on the death certificate was accepted 
without further checking. Data on the major causes of all infant deaths in also 
provided.

PMID: 4027452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Health Care Women Int. 1996 Jul-Aug;17(4):343-59. doi: 
10.1080/07399339609516250.

Midwifery in New Zealand: responding to changing times.

Fleming VE.

This article provides a critical overview of midwifery in New Zealand. It first 
considers the influences in society that have assisted midwives in campaigning 
for change. Also outlined is the partnership of midwives and consumers that 
created the climate for an Act of Parliament permitting independent midwifery 
practice in 1990. Changes to midwifery practice since 1990 are documented, as 
well as some of the backlash that has occurred since then. In this article, New 
Zealand midwifery is set in its global context, and the major issue of 
partnership is also highlighted.

DOI: 10.1080/07399339609516250
PMID: 8850768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Strateg Healthc Excell. 1992 Nov;5(11):4-12.

Five original recipes for strengthening hospital patient care.

Weber A.

Organizational innovation has a varied parentage--its famous mother being 
necessity--that can include the economic climate, marketplace characteristics, 
an organization's unique history and culture, leadership style, and corporate 
species. The following five Robert Wood Johnson Foundation/Pew Charitable Trusts 
grantees (see article, page 1) cast their own perspectives on approaches to 
strengthening nursing. The first three chose different emphases on programs 
built on existing practice models. The fourth hospital focuses on preparing the 
groundwork for major change, while the last looks outside at educating the youth 
who will eventually fill its caregiver roles.

PMID: 10123355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Commun Dis. 1994 Jun;26(2):109-15.

Plasmodium falciparum sensitivity in "in-vivo" and its distribution in 
geo-ecological zones of Gujarat.

Sahu GC(1), Pandya AP.

Author information:
(1)Regional office for Health and Family Welfare, Anand Estate, Industrial 
Estate, Bapunagar, Ahmedabad.

Plasmodium falciparum sensitivity test in "in-vivo" carried out in 450 patients 
revealed, parasite clearance in 66.45 percent cases with 25 mgm/kg body wt of 
chloroquine. Mean parasite clearance time (MPCT) of sensitive and R I, resistant 
cases reached near parallelism with an early recrudescence in RI cases 
indicating stabilisation of genetic change in the parasite strain. The analysis 
of data revealed that proportionately higher resistance was recorded in coastal 
area having deciduous (wet) forest ecotype followed by plains of deciduous dry 
forest and semi arid/arid ecotypes.

PMID: 7989673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Community Health. 1985 Winter;10(4):226-37. doi: 10.1007/BF01371016.

Policy changes and their possible impact on hospital-based ambulatory care.

Rogers D.

Hospital-based ambulatory care has been an important source of medical care, and 
most particularly so in New York City. In 1982, there were a total of 10,629,035 
visits to outpatient clinics and emergency rooms. In the present climate, there 
is pressure to shrink numbers of acute care beds, reduced Medicare reimbursement 
for graduate medical education, and withdraw payment for foreign medical 
graduates. The hospital by-product of ambulatory care will surely change as 
hospitals deal with survival in competition for the inpatient market.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01371016
PMID: 3938455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]